Cycling and walking
 On this page                                                                                                                                    <U+E87A>
 1. Temporary road and sidewalk changes
 2. Latest updates
 3. Active transportation in Guelph
 4. Bicycle-friendly Guelph
 5. Walking
 6. Adding sidewalks
   As part of plans to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, the City is making temporary
   road and sidewalk changes so people walking and cycling can stay 2 metres apart. The
   map shows the locations and the temporary changes at each site.
Temporary road and sidewalk changes
Active transportation in Guelph
When Guelph’s active transportation network is complete in 2027, it will connect the city from north to south and east to west on a 54-km
network of mostly off-road paths and trails. People of all ages and abilities will be able to use the network all year round.
     Guelph Active Transportation Network Map
     Guelph Active Transportation Network Study June 2017
     Trails and multi-use paths
     Progress report on Guelph’s cycling and walking programs
Bicycle-friendly Guelph
Guelph is using education, enforcement, engineering, encouragement and evaluation to make it easier and safer for people to travel by bike.
     Guelph cycling map
     Guelph cycling master plan
     Proposed cycling network
     Bicycle repair guides and video tutorials
Walking
     Crossing guards
     Pedestrian crossings
Walk to School
The City of Guelph is a partner in the Wellington Dufferin Active and Safe Routes to School Committee (ASRTS). Partners include:
     The Upper Grand District School Board
     Wellington Catholic District School Board

     Wellington Dufferin Public Health
     Student Transportation Services Wellington Dufferin
The vision of the Committee is that walking, cycling and other active modes will be attractive, realistic and safe modes of transportation for
school students.
For their health, safety, environment and community
      Kids learn healthy habits and concentrate better in class.
      One less car (yours) reduces traffic and parking problems in school zones.
      Teach your kids about traffic safety.
      Start a walking school bus; your kids make friends in every grade, and that can prevent bullying.Learn about Wellington Dufferin walking School bus program
Adding sidewalks
We’re adding new sidewalks every year based on Guelph’s sidewalk needs assessment study. The study reviewed guidelines for sidewalk
construction, explored municipal best practices, developed criteria for ranking locations for new sidewalks, proposed an implementation
strategy and cost estimate for completing the sidewalk network.
      Guelph Sidewalk Needs Assessment Study
      Guelph Sidewalk Needs Assessment Study Addendum – Metcalfe Street
      Existing sidewalk network