Active Transportation
Active transportation (AT) is any form of human powered transportation that gets you to and from work, school,
shopping, appointments, recreation, visiting friends, etc. In other words, AT is ‘physical activity’ with ‘purpose’. Walking
and cycling are the most popular forms of AT and are often combined with other travel modes such as public transit.
The Problem…
Physical activity is good for health at all ages yet only 22% of
Canadian adults achieve the recommended amount of 150
minutes per week and 9% of children & youth achieve the
recommended 60 minutes per day according to the Canadian
Guidelines.
Active Transportation can be part of the
solution!
Active transportation is a way to make physical activity a
regular part of everyday life. It is also good for mental health,
overall well-being, safety, the environment and the economy.
Benefits of Using Active Transportation
      Reduced risk of several chronic diseases
      Improved fitness
      Healthier body weight
      Positive mental health 
      Reduced stress   
      Improved productivity at school and work
      Reduced motor vehicle-related injuries and deaths
      Improved air quality
      Reduced greenhouse gas emissions
      Reduced spending on gas and parking

      Improved social connections
Active & Safe Routes to School (ASRTS)
ASRTS is a community partnership across Elgin, Oxford and
Middlesex Counties and the cities of London and St. Thomas.
They work together to encourage children and families to
choose active transportation.
School Travel Planning (STP) is their primary program that
encourages active transportation to and from school by
developing an action plan to build upon strengths and work to
remove concerns around the school.
Community Design & Active
Transportation
The design of neighbourhood streets, buildings and facilities can influence everyday transportation choices. Active
community design makes it easier for people of all ages and abilities to live active lifestyles. Find out how to design a
healthy community:
      Neighbourhoods
      Housing
      Transportation
      Public Spaces
The Ontario Professional Planners Institute calls for widespread action to implement an active transportation
system that prioritizes a complete streets approach for all road users when it comes to road design and community
development.
   Get moving with Active Transportation as part of a healthy lifestyle!
Resources
      8 80 Cities

