                   District School Board Ontario North East
                                                                <U+F002>
School Bus Transportation
You can access North East Tri-Board Student Transportation by visiting the website, or by calling:
              1-800-381-7280 for the Northern Region (Matheson to Hearst)
              1-800-461-8759 for the Southern Region (Temagami to Kirkland Lake)
School Bus Transportation
School bus transportation for students of District School Board Ontario North East is managed by North East
Tri-Board Student Transportation (NETBST). This tri-board initiative, bringing school bus service to the Districts
of Cochrane and Timiskaming, is a partnership formed by the following school boards:
       District School Board Ontario North East
       Northeastern Catholic District School Board
       Conseil scolaire public du Nord-Est de
       l'Ontario
School Bus Eligibility
To determine if your child is eligible for school bus transportation, search for your address on our Transportation
Eligibility Page. All requests for school bus transportation are to be made through the administration o ce, at
your child's school.
       School Bus Rider Usage Policy
       NETBST has initiated its School Bus Rider Usage Policy, e ective February, 2016. Please take a moment
       to review the new policy with your children.

       School Bus Rider Usage Policy
       Special Request Form
       If the administration o ce has advised you that a special request form is required, please access it here:
       Special Request Form
Inclement Weather Policy & Procedures
During the winter months, inclement weather may force the cancellation of school busses. Take a moment to
familiarize yourself with our cancellation process.
Inclement Weather Policy and Procedures
       Cancellation & Delays
       Click to access Cancellations and Delays on GeoQuery.
       Email Subscriptions
       You can subscribe to email updates for your children's bus routes, and be updated
       immediately of any delays or cancellations.
       RSS Feed
       You can also subscribe to the RSS Feed for immediate updates of any delays or
       cancellations.
School Bus Safety Videos
The province has released school bus safety videos for all riders that are elementary school age.
English Videos
First Time Riders: https://vimeo.com/229625011
JK to Grade 3: https://vimeo.com/229631702
Grade 4 to 8: https://vimeo.com/230603498
French Videos
First Time Riders: https://vimeo.com/229627547
JK to Grade 3: https://vimeo.com/230615911
Grade 4 to 8: https://vimeo.com/230609408
Why Partner with NETBST?

North East Tri-Board Student Transportation (NETBST) is committed to providing a safe and e cient
transportation system to the school districts of Cochrane and Timiskaming. We are currently monitoring and
reviewing our transportation system for safety, route e ciencies, and adherence to Board Policies.
Quick Links:
      School Bus Delay and Cancellation Notices
      School Bus Eligibility
      Walking Distances
      Joint Transportation Policies and Procedures
                             I Stop, You Stop! Let's keep our children safe!

