Transportation
Durham Student Transportation Services (DSTS) is responsible for ensuring safe and
efficient transportation to and from school for eligible students in accordance
with policy. Visit the DSTS website to view the Transportation Policy.
Bus Cancellations and Delays
Inclement Weather Cancellations
Occasionally, transportation is cancelled due to weather
conditions. Depending on the location and type of weather
occurrence, transportation can be cancelled for a specific
zone. Visit the DSTS website to determine your child's
weather zone. When transportation is cancelled in the
morning, it is cancelled for the entire day.
To connect to the DSTS automated phone line, call 1-866-
908-6578 or 905-666-6979.
Additional Information on Cancellations Due to
Inclement Weather
          Weather conditions can be variable within the large geographic areas across
          the GTA and the communities served by the Durham Catholic District School
          Board. Therefore, decisions may be specific to some or all areas of the
          board.
          Transportation decisions are not made lightly. They are made by both
          school boards, Durham Student Transportation Services (DSTS) and bus
          company representatives who consult with and collect information from
          municipal road maintenance crews and weather monitoring authorities.
          These decisions are made in the best interest of student safety, which
          includes making every effort to keep schools open for students.

          We aim to keep schools open as regularly as possible as we recognize the
          tremendous impact a school closure has on our families. Parents and
          guardians entrust schools to provide services for students.
          School closures also affect child care and family centres in our schools.
          As always, parents make the ultimate decision as to whether or not their
          children should attend school during inclement weather conditions.
          Student absence due to inclement weather will not negatively affect
          attendance records or academic assessments.
Contact Durham Catholic District School Board
650 Rossland Rd. W
Oshawa, ON L1J 7C4
Phone: 905-576-6150
Toll Free: 1-877-482-0722
Quick Links and Resources
      Students
      Parents
      Schools
      Programs
      Our Board
      Feedback
      Staff Login
© 2021 Durham Catholic District School Board
AccessibilityContact UsReport ItSitemapCareersFOI Request

