                                                    Powered by            Translate
Important information about
student transportation
August 30, 2017 — As families prepare for back to school, it is a good time to
provide an update about student transportation.
This article describes:
     student transportation eligibility based on the distance from home to school
     courtesy riders
     how to check for eligibility and pick-up/drop-off locations
     links to more information
Providing safe, secure, on-time and cost-effective student transportation is the
goal of Tri-Board Student Transportation Services Inc. Tri-Board provides
transportation services to students of Hastings and Prince Edward District School
Board and other school boards.
Students may be eligible for transportation (busing) to and from school within the
allowable limits defined by Hastings and Prince Edward District School Board.
Student transportation eligibility*
     JK to Grade 6
          further than 1.6 km to school
          further than 0.8 km to the bus pick-up
     Grades 7 & 8
          further than 3.2 km to school
          further than 0.8 km to the bus pick-up
     Grades 9 – 12

          further than 3.2 km to school
          further than 1.6 km to the bus pick-up
*The distances may be adjusted for hazardous conditions or for students with
special needs.
Courtesy riders
Please be aware that transportation is not automatically provided to students who
attend optional programs—for example the Arts Program, Destinations, French
Immersion, or International Baccalaureate—and who live outside the boundary
area for the host school. However, if surplus space is available on existing bus
routes, students attending optional programs may be able to access transportation
as courtesy riders. The number and types of buses and routes are reviewed
annually due to ridership and route modifications in order to ensure an effective
and sustainable student transportation system. Changes occur from year to year,
which affect the amount of space available for courtesy riders.
How to check for transportation eligibility, pick-up and drop-off locations
Families can use an online look-up feature on the Tri-Board website to check for
transportation eligibility. Go to www.triboard.ca > hover over the Eligibility menu
item > click Transportation Eligibility Search > key in the information requested.
Families can also check pick-up and drop-off times for their child on the Tri-Board
website by scrolling to the Student Transportation Information at the bottom of
the page. For security purposes, you are required to provide the child’s Ontario
Education Number (OEN), birth date, school and grade.
More information

                         HPEDSB Policy 17: Transportation of Students (Pdf)
                         Tri-Board policies and procedures https://triboard.ca/index.cfm?
                         action=main.transportationPolicyAndProcedures, which includes topics
                         about:
                              Transportation application
                              Bus behavior expectations
                              Cancellations
                              Emergency administration of First Aid, CPR, EpiPens
                              Special circumstance transportation
                              Students with special needs requiring transportation
                              Transporting students with service animals
                              Use of electronic devices on school buses
                              Video surveillance
                              . . . and more
                    Contact information for Tri-Board Student
                    Transportation Services
                    Website: www.triboard.ca
                    Email: info@triboard.ca
                    Toll-free: 1-866-569-6638
                      Last updated: January 15, 2018 at 10:42 am
Home
Students
   Distance Education
      e-Learning
      International Student Program
      Quinte Adult Education
      Summer School
   Learning Resources

     40 Hours of Community Service
     Indigenous Self Identification
     Technology Embedded Learning
     Virtual Learning Environment
  Leadership
     Student Senate
     Student Trustees
  Well-Being
     Equity, Diversity & Inclusion
     Growing with Character
     Student Mental Health & Well-Being
     School Spotlight
Community & Families
  Find A School
     Programs
     Register for School
     School Groups
     Visit Our Schools
  Get Involved
     Parent & Community Engagement
     Parent Resources
     Volunteering
  Services
     Busing
     Child Care
     Rent Space in a School
     Special Needs Support
     The HPE Learning Foundation
     Student Records & Transcripts Requests
  Resources

      Accessibility Plan & Inquiries
      Elementary Athletic Association
      Ontario Ombudsman
      School Calendar
      School Spotlight
      Special Education Advisory Cmte.
      Student Accident Insurance
Board
  Boardroom
      Board & Committee Meetings
      Senior Administration
      Trustees
  Resources
      Accommodation Reviews
      Broader Public Sector Documents
      Energy & Environment Reports
      Freedom of Information
      Long-Term Capital & Accommodation Plan
      Policies & Procedures
      Publications
  Connections
      About Us
      Bids & Tenders
      Community Planning & Partnerships
      Contact Us
      Director of Education’s Blog
      Newsroom
      Recognition Days

