Transportation
 Take a 3D Tour
 Explore your local Kindergarten class!
   EXPLORE TODAY
 Need updates on COVID-19?
 Updates on COVID-19 will always be posted to OCSB Supports.

         LEARN MORE
                                               Our Schools
  Register
  OCSB Calendar
  Transportation
  Boundaries
  Parents
  Child Care
  Student Health
Transportation information
The Ottawa Student Transportation Authority (OSTA) is responsible for the management and administration
of all home to school transportation on behalf of the Ottawa Catholic School Board (OCSB) and the Ottawa-
Carleton District School Board (OCDSB).
In order to secure a seat for your child from the rst day of school, it is important
that you ensure an accurate home or daycare address is in the school’s
information system prior to July. Routes will be run with all stops as planned from
the rst day of school, regardless of intermittent KG start up schedule.
Eligibility for yellow school bus transportation
The Ottawa Student Transportation Authority (OSTA) shall provide transportation for students who reside, or in
the case of students in elementary grades (KG to Grade 8) whose caregiver resides, within the designated
attendance and/or program boundary of the school they are attending and meet the minimum transportation
eligibility distances as follows:
   Junior and/or Senior Kindergarten 0.8 km or more
   Grades 1 to 8 1.6 km or more
The caregiver address shall supersede the home address within the designated attendance boundary of the
school attended for distance measurement purposes. The pickup and drop o addresses must be consistent
 ve (5) days a week.
Requests for bus stop changes
Changes to transportation services must be made directly to OSTA, who will prioritize requests based on safety
concerns, urgency, and volume of requests. Visit OSTA’s website to:

   request a bus stop change
   report a walking hazard
   report a service issue (such as delays)
   discuss eligibility and alternate services
Resources for students in the walk zone
We encourage students and their parents who are within the walk zone to use human-powered transportation.
This leads to a healthier lifestyle, readiness to learn, and reduces tra c congestion around the school.
Preferred walk routes to every school are available at:
http://www.ottawaschoolbus.ca/resources/walking-routes. Addresses inside the green line are designated
walkers. Addresses outside the green line are assigned motorized transportation. If the address is in a shaded
area inside the walk zone, the address is assigned to motorized transportation based on a walking hazard.
Meeting kindergarten students at their stop
To ensure the safety of transported Kindergarten students, school bus drivers shall not drop o these students
unless the parent/guardian or a responsible individual identi ed by the parent/guardian is present at the stop
location to accompany the student home. If there is no one at the stop to receive your Kindergarten student,
s/he may be transported back to the school to be picked up by the parent/guardian or may be dropped o at
the local police station. Failure to receive your KG child at the stop may result in termination of transportation
services.
OSTA will be providing bright yellow plastic tags for each KG student. Schools will attach these tags to any KG
student’s backpack (preferably on the lower left side) that is assigned to motorized transportation services.
These bands will assist the driver in making sure a responsible person is at the stop to collect the student at
their drop o point, per policy.
Variable transportation for students with two
homes
Students who are in a joint custody arrangement and require transportation to two homes may apply for
transportation to an alternate home/daycare location based on the parties’ access schedule. All eligibility rules
apply to the second address. Deadline for September 2019 seating is June 1, 2019. Click here for more
information.
Applying for an empty seat on a bus
Courtesy Seating (Empty Seats) for Students in Walk Zones Students, who do not meet the distance eligibility
requirement for motorized transportation, may apply for an empty seat on the school bus. The “Application for
Access to Empty Seats on School Bus Vehicles” form is available on the OSTA website at
http://www.ottawaschoolbus.ca/policies-procedures/empty-seat-seat-availability-provision.
All applications are processed and managed by OSTA. Deadline for Empty Seat applications for consideration in
October is September 23, 2019. OSTA will begin reviewing and processing applications after October 1. This
ensures accurate rider numbers and how many empty seats may be assigned to other students. Please do not
place your child on a bus until the seat assignment has been con rmed through the Bus Planner Parent Portal.
We have also instructed schools not to put unassigned students on buses for the ride home. To do so could
compromise your child’s safety, as their name would not show up on any bus route lists.

Transportation for students with special needs
Students with physical or mental disabilities may be eligible for transportation as approved by the OCSB’s
Student Services Department. Proper documentation is necessary to initiate special transportation, including
any subsequent address or time changes. A Request for Special Transportation form must be completed by a
school o cial and forwarded to Student Services for consideration and approval. Once approved, the form is
received by OSTA where transportation will be arranged, and the designated taxi / van operator will contact
parents directly with the arrangements and e ective date.
Bus cancellations due to inclement weather
Transportation cancellations due to bad weather or poor road conditions are posted on OSTA’s website by 6:15
am. When transportation is cancelled due to bad weather or poor road conditions, transportation is cancelled
for all schools. There are several ways in which you can stay on top of bus cancellations.
Bus Stop Finder and the Bus Planner Parent Portal
Visit OSTA’s website to see if your address is eligible for transportation services, to view yellow school bus and
OC Transpo bus route schedules, and more.
Parents may access transportation information for their child as of August 19 using the Parent Portal on
www.ottawaschoolbus.ca, or by clicking Bus Stop Finder. Eligibility will be identi ed as “walker” or will provide
information about yellow bus or van service.
    VISIT OSTA
Subscribe
Subscribe to OSTA’s mailing list to receive email noti cations of transportation cancellations right to your
handheld device or personal computer.
Watch
Watch OSTA’s website after 6:15 am to see if a cancellation has been posted to their Transportation Monitor, or
if there will be signi cant delays in service.
Listen
Listen to the radio after 6:15 am for announcements which are repeated at least twice per hour. Stations such
as 580 CFRA FM, Hot 89.9 FM and 1310 on your AM dial.
Follow
Follow OSTA on Twitter @OttSchoolBus or follow the OCSB @OttCatholicSB
               Contact OSTA
               Ottawa Student Transportation Authority
               1645 W d         A        S it 101

1645 Woodro e Avenue, Suite 101
Nepean, Ontario K2G 1W2
Phone: 613-224-8800
Fax: 613-224-8840
E-mail: admin@ottawaschoolbus.ca
                                 Menu
                                Why OCSB?
                               Our Programs
                                Our Schools
                                 Our Board
                                  Careers
                                Get Involved
                                  Contact
                             Contact Us
         613-224-2222       info@ocsb.ca     570 West Hunt Club Road

        613 224 2222         info@ocsb.ca          570 West Hunt Club Road
                                Connect
               The Ottawa Catholic School Board Copyright © 2020.
                Sitemap Privacy Policy Accessibility Committee
Portals JK-6 Students 7-12 Students Parent portal Adult Learners Sta    Retirees

