                                                                                                         459 Victoria Ave W.                  Tel: (807) 625-1555
                                                                                                  Thunder Bay, ON P7C 0A4                    Fax: (807) 623-0431
Active School Transportation
What is Active School Transportation?
Active School Travel uses any human-powered active mode of transportation to commute to and from school including, but not limited to:
  <U+F105> Biking
  <U+F105> Walking
  <U+F105> Scootering
  <U+F105> Inline skating
  <U+F105> Skateboarding
  <U+F105> Via wheelchair
Bene ts of active school travel can be attributed to ve broad categories: physical health, mental health, environmental health, academic success, and increased
tra c safety. Children who actively commute report greater levels of happiness and conversely report lower levels of stress and anxiety. Reducing the number of
individual families commuting by motor vehicle decreases greenhouse gas emissions resulting in cleaner air in school zones and a healthier environment. Active
school travel contributes to healthy brain development and academic success, particularly among girls. Students who engage in active school travel have higher
grade point averages, and in particular, cycling has been related to higher grades in mathematics.
WOW Thunder Bay
Walk or Wheel Thunder Bay (WOW TBay) is program that encourages families to choose active transportation for the trip to and from school. Active
transportation refers to any form of human-powered (non-motorized) travel such as walking, cycling, using a wheelchair, scooter, or skateboard. It is part of a
province-wide Ontario Active School Travel project. Active transportation increases physical activity, improves physical, mental and emotional health while also
bene ting our environment.
WOW TBay is run by EcoSuperior Environmental Programs and the Thunder Bay District Health Unit.

It is a partnership that includes sta from Thunder Bay Catholic District School Board, Lakehead Public Schools, Student Transportation Services of Thunder Bay,
the City of Thunder Bay, and Thunder Bay Police Service.
We are proud to be part of this great initiative, with St. Thomas Aquinas School being our frontrunner.
https://www.tbcschools.ca/schools/active-school-transportation
© Thunder Bay Catholic District School Board 2021

