Home / Schools / Active and Safe Routes to School
 Active and Safe Routes to School
 The Upper Grand District School Board is a partner in the
 Wellington Du erin Guelph Active and Safe Routes to School
 (ASRTS) Committee. The vision of the Committee is that walking,
 cycling and other active modes will be attractive, realistic and
 safe modes of transportation for school students in Wellington,
 Du erin and Guelph.
 Schools can encourage active travel to school year-round by
 organizing regular walking events and activities. Annual events
 include Walk to School Month (October) and Winter Walk Day (February), Spring into Spring (April
 and June) and Bike to School Week (May or June). Schools can receive a Certi cate of Participation
 when they register their Walk to School Month or Winter Walk Day events through the Active and
 Safe Routes to School website.
 Why Walk?
 The bene ts of walking to school include:
        Increased physical activity
        Reduced tra c congestion
        Improved air quality
        Enhanced neighbourhood safety
        A greater sense of community
 When we walk to school, even if it’s just for the last few blocks, we contribute to a happier,
 healthier, cleaner, and safer school neighbourhood.
 Tips for Safely Walking and Riding to School

Parents/guardians can help children learn about walking or riding to school safely by:
       Being a good role model. Demonstrate road safety rules with your child (e.g. looking both
       ways when crossing the street).
       Planning a walking or riding route. Assess potential hazards with your child. Encourage your
       child to stick to the route.
       Reminding your child about personal safety. Point out the houses of people you know where
       they can go for help if needed.
       Adopting a buddy system. Walk with a “walking buddy” – a sibling or a friend.
       Asking that electronics like iPods and cellphones be put in their bag while walking to school.
       Pedestrian safety is compromised by texting, earphones and cellphone conversation.
       Talking about the rules of the road and pedestrian safety.
Walk to (and at) School Day
Walk to School Day is an international event that encourages students to be active on their journey
between home and school. On special days throughout the school year, ASRTS encourages parents
and guardians to walk, bike or wheel to school with us. The ASRTS committee is encouraging
schools with bused students to also participate by organizing a walk around the school yard at
lunch or before bell time.
Walking and riding to school are great ways to include physical activity into the day, and it is well
known that students who use active travel to get to school arrive alert and ready to learn.
School Travel Planning
School Travel Planning (STP) is a comprehensive process that is undertaken to assess the barriers
to active school transportation in order to develop and implement action plans. See the ASRTS STP
web page for further information.
In recent years, the Wellington-Du erin-Guelph ASRTS Committee has completed school travel
plans for eight (8) of the Upper Grand District School Board’s schools:

       Hyland Heights ES (Shelburne)
       Jean Little PS (Guelph)
       Ken Danby PS (Guelph)
       École King George PS (Guelph)
       Mitchell Woods PS (Guelph)
       Princess Margaret PS (Orangeville)
       Rockwood Centennial PS (Rockwood)
       Victoria Cross PS (Mount Forest)
School Travel Planning: Feasibility Study for Ontario Ministry of Education
The Wellington-Du erin-Guelph Region, together with the City of Toronto participated in a School
Travel Planning feasibility study, led by Green Communities Canada on behalf of the Ontario
Ministry of Education. The study examined the di erences in delivering School Travel Planning in
urban, suburban and rural communities. The study began in April 2014 and the         nal report was
completed in February 2016. Partners for the project included:
       Green Communities Canada
       City of Toronto
       Wellington-Du erin-Guelph Public Health
       Share the Road Cycling Coalition
       Ontario Ministry of Education
       City of Guelph
       Toronto District School Board
       Toronto Catholic District School Board
       Toronto Student Transportation Group
       University of Toronto
       Upper Grand District School Board
       Participating communities
The feasibility study included School Travel Planning for the following ve (5) schools in the Upper
Grand DSB:
       Glenbrook PS (Shelburne)
       J.D. Hogarth PS (Fergus)
       Minto-Cli ord PS (Harriston)
       Montgomery Village PS (Orangeville)
       Rickson Ridge PS (Guelph)
Resources

Active Travel
          Active School Travel Ideas and Activities
          Active Transportation Campaign Kit
          Adult School Crossing Guards – Municipal Contacts
          CAA School Safety Patrol
          Young Cyclists Guide
Lesson Plan Ideas
       CAA Ontario Road Safety Lesson Plan Ideas (K-12)
          Grade 1 Science and Technology Lesson
          Grade 5 Social Studies Lesson
          Grade 9 Health and Physical Education Lesson
          Teacher’s Kit with Lesson Plan Ideas (K-8)
Promotion
          Active and Safe Routes to School Infographic
          Guelph Police School Safety Poster
          Making the Case for Active School Travel
          Parking Bylaw Reminder – Guelph Schools
          Parking Bylaw Reminder – Non Guelph Schools
Ontario Active School Travel Website
The Ontario Active School Travel website is a great place to go for tools that can help encourage
active travel at your school. The site o ers information and resources that explain and support:
       Bene ts of active travel
       School Travel Planning
       Solutions that work
       Walk and wheel events
       And much more!
Click here to access the site.
Wellington Du erin Guelph ASRTS Committee Member Organizations:

