                                                       Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
                                                          Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                                                  Journal of Transport & Health
                                                journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jth
‘I’d paint rainbows and unicorns on it’: Understanding children’s
school travel behaviours and the impact of a new shared path
Niamh Donnellan *, Victoria Egli, Melody Smith
The School of Nursing, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
A R T I C L E I N F O                                   A B S T R A C T
Keywords:                                               Introduction: Evidence shows there is a clear link between active travel to school and children’s
Active transport                                        physical activity levels. Active school travel (AST) in New Zealand has declined while car travel to
Cycling                                                 school has increased. The aim of this research is to understand the factors related to travel mode
Mixed methods
                                                        to school from the perspectives of children, their parents and school representatives, through the
Child-centred
Walking
                                                        evaluation of a shared path in Whang<U+FFFD>    arei, New Zealand.
                                                        Methods: Children, their parents and school representatives were recruited through four schools
                                                        located close to a new shared path intervention. Children’s mode of travel to school before and
                                                        after the construction of the new shared path was measured using repeat hands-up surveys. The
                                                        study was conducted using a child-centred approach. 13 semi-structured focus groups with
                                                        children (8–12 years old), phones interviews with 35 parents, and face-to-face interviews with
                                                        four school representatives were conducted. Quantitative data were described descriptively and
                                                        qualitative data were analysed using inductive and deductive thematic analysis based on the Kids-
                                                        PoND framework.
                                                        Results: Three out of four schools surveyed reported small but promising increases in the pro­
                                                        portion of AST from pre to post shared path intervention. Triangulation of qualitative data from
                                                        children, parents and school representatives’ revealed a number of factors related to children’s
                                                        mode of travel to school, including: convenience, safety (traffic and ‘stranger danger’), fun, health
                                                        benefits, social environment, weather and environment. All groups also gave a number of sug­
                                                        gestions to improve the accessibility, utility and safety of the new shared path.
                                                        Conclusion: Important insights into why new infrastructure may or may not be successful at
                                                        enabling AST can be garnered from understanding child, parent and school representatives’
                                                        perspectives. Our findings have implications for urban and town planners, AST policy makers and
                                                        public health.
1. Introduction
1.1. Children’s active travel in Aotearoa New Zealand
    Active travel (e.g., walking, cycling, or scootering for transport) is a physical activity behavior of particular interest for researchers,
 * Corresponding author. School of Nursing, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland Mail
Centre 1142, New Zealand
    E-mail address: n.donnellan@auckland.ac.nz (N. Donnellan).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2020.100838
Received 31 October 2019; Received in revised form 16 February 2020; Accepted 22 February 2020
Available online 20 April 2020
2214-1405/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                   Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
policymakers and practitioners due to the substantial opportunities for positively impacting human and environmental health (Mandic
et al., 2019). Evidence from international systematic reviews (Faulkner et al., 2009; Larouche et al., 2014; Schoeppe et al., 2013) and
research in Aotearoa New Zealand (hereafter referred to as NZ) (Oliver et al., 2016) demonstrate a clear link between active travel
(predominantly active travel to school) and physical activity in children. Additionally active school travel (AST) has been related to
improved cardiovascular fitness (for cycling) (Larouche et al., 2014). As with physical activity, active travel in NZ children has been
steadily declining. Between 1990 and 2015, the rates of walking and cycling to school have decreased from 42% to 29% and 12% and
2% respectively, while car travel to school increased from 32% to 57% (Ministry of Transport, 2015). Despite the NZ Physical Activity
Report Card (Smith et al., 2018), and recent NZ research (Ikeda et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2020), identifying a number of supports for
AST across wha     <U+FFFD>nau (family) (e.g., parents valuing being active together), school (e.g., AST programmes and policies), community and
environment (e.g., policies, strategies, and infrastructure to increase active travel) and government (e.g., allocated funding to increase
physical activity) settings, a number of barriers remain. Indeed the NZ Physical Activity report cards (2014, 2016 and 2018) have
shown an ongoing trend of low active travel rates in NZ children (Smith et al., 2019b).
1.2. Environments and children’s physical activity and active travel
    Clear associations between built environments and children’s physical activity and active travel behaviours exist. A 2014 sys­
tematic review found links between physical activity and availability of facilities, parks and playgrounds, and inconclusive results
regarding safety, traffic and weather (Oliveira et al., 2014). Presence of sidewalks (footpaths) and cycle lanes were associated with
physical activity, likely to be accumulated through active travel. However, this literature was of a predominantly cross-sectional
evidence base, limiting understanding of whether the environment directly causes behaviours. Recently a systematic review limited
to study designs where causality could be inferred showed how a number of environmental features impacted children’s activity and
active travel (Smith et al., 2017). The review reported multi-component park renovations were linked to significant increases in
physical activity across all age groups, and multi-component streetscape interventions were associated with higher levels of active
travel in children. Importantly, installation of new greenways was associated with significant increases in physical activity and active
travel (Smith et al., 2017).
    Published NZ research on the environment-activity relationship in children has been predominantly cross-sectional to date.
Findings have shown links between children’s active travel and street connectivity and destination accessibility (positive) and distance
to school (negative), and between physical activity and transport environments that support walking and cycling and have lower traffic
speeds (Oliver et al., 2015). Reports from a large sample of parents in Auckland, NZ’s largest city, revealed parental desires for safer
traffic environments to facilitate their child’s independent neighbourhood walking, cycling, and scootering (Smith et al., 2019a). In the
same study, children reported enjoying spending time with friends and family and being active; and disliking unsafe traffic envi­
ronments (Egli et al., 2019).
1.3. Evaluation of environmental interventions for active school travel
    Numerous environmental interventions to support AST exist worldwide. Yet the impacts of these infrastructural changes on
children’s school travel modes are rarely evaluated. To some extent, this may be due to the challenges of aligning timing, funding, and
priorities across practitioners and researchers (Witten et al., 2018). One noteworthy exception is the Safe Routes to School programme
(Boarnet et al., 2005), where extensive evaluation of a range of interventions has been conducted. Results have demonstrated the
significant potential impact of providing safe places to walk and cycle on children’s active travel modes (McDonald et al., 2013).
Additional gaps lie in terms of understanding the impact of interventions from the perspectives of children, their parents, and school
representatives. Child-centred research that values the child voice and meaningful participation (Barker and Weller, 2003; Christensen
and James, 2008) in evaluating an intervention is also important for AST. Parents are the gatekeepers of their child’s activity, and
children can be active agents and advocates for their own active travel behaviours. Schools have an in-depth understanding of their
wider school community and potential broader issues that may explain why an intervention may or may not have the desired impact
(Hawley et al., 2019). Understanding child, parent, and school representative perspectives about new infrastructure can yield
important insights into why infrastructure may or may not be successful.
1.4. Study aim
    It is clear that environmental features can enable or constrain children’s ability to travel by active means. Improving safety from
traffic is a key strategy to facilitate children’s active travel. In this context, separated walkways and cycleways may be especially
effective for supporting active travel modes for young children. In Whang<U+FFFD>     arei, NZ, an opportunity arose to evaluate the impact of a new
shared path on children’s active travel behaviours to school. Through an evaluation of a shared path intervention, the aim of this
research is to understand factors related to travel mode to school from the perspectives of children, their parents and school
representatives.
                                                                        2

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                   Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
2. Methods
2.1. Study area
    Whanga   <U+FFFD>rei is the most northerly city in NZ and Whang<U+FFFD>  arei district has an estimated population of 91,230 (Statistics New Zealand,
2018). The district is part of NZ’s only subtropical climate zone with warm summers (average high of 24 <U+FFFD> C) and mild winters (average
high of 16 <U+FFFD> C) (Whanga    <U+FFFD>rei District Council, 2020). Whanga  <U+FFFD>rei City is part of the Urban Cycleways Programme, a national cycling
investment in cycleways across 15 urban centres in NZ. The Whang<U+FFFD>         arei arm of the Urban Cycleway Programme has a major focus on
encouraging more children to safely cycle to school. With investment from national and local government, two stages of a new shared
path, have been constructed along the rail corridor protected from traffic and links the town centre with northern neighbourhoods. The
first two stages (2.3 km) of the shared path were opened to the public in early December 2018 and a further three stages are planned to
extend the shared path to a total length of 6.5 km.
2.2. Study design and participants
    This was a repeat cross-sectional study of children’s mode of travel to school before and after the construction of new walking and
cycling infrastructure, combined with a cross-sectional qualitative examination of child, parent, and school representative perspectives
about the infrastructure and its use.
    Four schools (three primary and one intermediate) were purposively selected for this study based on their proximity to the new
shared path and following consultation with Whanga       <U+FFFD>rei District Council, who were interested in children’s active travel behaviours
from those particular schools. Representatives from the council invited schools to participate in the study in November 2017. ND held
face-to-face meetings with the schools in February 2019. Parent information sheets and consent forms, and child information sheets
and assent forms were left with school principals for distribution to children. Written informed consent was required from school
principals for the school to participate in the study. In each school, all classes for school years 3–8 (approximate ages 8–12 years) were
involved in the hands-up survey. For the child focus groups, parent consent for their child to participate and child assent to participate
were required. Parent consent was required to participate in the parent telephone interviews. School representative consent was
required to participate in the face-to-face interviews. Ethical approval to conduct the research was provided by the University of
Auckland Human Participants Ethics Committee (020557, June 21, 2018).
2.3. Measures
    School travel mode was measured using a hands-up survey for which validity and reliability has been demonstrated in NZ children
(de Wit et al., 2012). At the beginning of class each day over five consecutive weekdays teachers asked each child in their class “How
did you come to school today?” and to raise their hand if they came to school by family car, friend’s car, scooter/skateboard, bike,
walking or bus. Children were marked as absent if not at school on the day. Data were collected at two or three time points, depending
on the school, always one pre-path and one post-path. The first survey was completed in early December 2017 (pre-path), the second in
early September 2018 (pre-path), and the third in late March 2019 (post-path).
    Focus groups were held with children at each of the four schools with ND and VE in early April 2019. A semi-structured set of
questions were used to guide the focus groups and included a range of questions, including how they usually get to school, what they
like and dislike about their route, what they think about walking, cycling or scootering to school in general, what they think about the
new shared path, if they had any ideas on how to encourage more children to walk, cycle or scooter to school and what they think of the
new path for others in the community.
    School representative interviews were conducted face-to-face. Interviews were informed by a semi-structured set of questions and
were held with a school representative from each school by ND in early April 2019. School representatives were asked what they
thought of the new shared path, if they had an active school policy, if they actively encourage children to walk/cycle to school, if they
have done any promotion of the new path with children and parents/caregivers (hereafter parents) and what factors affect parent’s
decisions to let their child walk, cycle or scooter to school.
    Phone interviews with parents were completed in April 2019 by ND and followed a semi-structured set of questions. Parents were
asked the following questions: how their child usually travelled to school, what were the main reasons for using that mode of travel, if
they knew about the new shared path, what they thought of the new path, what the main factors/barriers that impact whether their
child walks, cycles or scooters to school, whether the new shared path affects their decision to let their child walk, cycle or scooter to
school, whether the shared path encourages their family to take more trips to other places, and when they were their child’s age how
they got to school and why has it changed since then.
2.4. Data treatment and analysis
2.4.1. Hands-up surveys
    Travel modes were grouped as follows: family and friend’s car ¼ car; scooter/skateboard, bike and walk ¼ active, bus remained the
same and the combination of going by car and walking ¼ mixed mode. Data were examined descriptively and results presented for each
school.
                                                                        3

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                           Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
2.4.2. Focus groups and interviews
    Qualitative data were analysed using inductive and deductive thematic analysis, involving six phases: (1) familiarisation with the
data, (2) coding, (3) generating initial themes, (4) reviewing themes, (5) defining and naming themes, and (6) writing up. All authors
have a shared interest in environments and child health, and activating child voice in this context, with particular regard to respecting
and valuing children’s ideas and perspectives.
    ND and VE ran focus groups with children, ND ran all interviews with parents and school representatives and read all transcripts in
their entirety to confirm content and ensure familiarisation with the data. Transcripts were also revisited by ND and VE throughout the
data analysis to confirm results and interpretation. ND undertook all qualitative data coding. For child focus group data, the Kids-PoND
framework (Kids-Perceptions of Neighbourhood Destinations) (Egli et al., 2019) was used as a guide. The Kids-PoND framework
developed by VE and team, offers a way to contextualise and understand children’s perceptions and use of neighbourhood destinations.
Initially ND and VE analysed two focus groups in partnership to ensure interpretation of codes was consistent with the Kids-PoND
framework and to identify new study-specific codes. School representative and parent data were coded by ND and a random 10%
subset was checked by VE. Potential themes were identified by ND in consultation with MS and VE. Deductive analyses focused on the
key research questions. Inductive analyses were undertaken to generate additional new topics that were identified. Themes were then
reviewed by ND and VE, including revisiting the transcripts, reflecting on the study aims; the commonalities and differences observed
across children, parents, and school representatives; and the key messages and topics that were identified. Finally, the themes were
described and supporting quotes were included to corroborate the key findings (Baxter and Eyles, 1997).
3. Results
3.1. Socio-demographic characteristics of schools
    Descriptive data are provided in Table 1. Three of the four schools are state run (schools B, C and D) and school A is a private
Catholic school.
3.2. Proportion of travel modes to school
    Three hands-up surveys (two pre-path, one post-path) were completed for schools A and D and two surveys (one pre-path and one
post-path) were completed for schools B and C (Fig. 1).
    From surveys 2 to 3 (pre to post-path), the proportion of trips taken by car increased 2% at school A, increased 7% at school C and
decreased 4% at school D. In school B, the proportion of trips by car decreased 6% from surveys 1 to 3 (pre to post-path). At schools A, B
and D, the proportion of active travel to school increased by 3%, 2% and 6% respectively, whereas active travel decreased at school C
by 8% pre to post-path intervention. Travel to school by bus decreased at schools A and D (2% and 1%), increased by 2% at school B
and remained the same (1%) at school C. Mixed mode travel to school (taking the car and walking) decreased to less than 1% at school
A, at schools B and C mixed mode increased 2% and 1%, respectively, and only one child reported using mixed mode school at school
D.
Table 1
Summary table of school characteristics.
  School characteristics                                  School A               School B                School C               School D State run, primary
                                                          Privately run, primary State run, intermediate State run, primary
  School roll n                                           510                    638                     594                    242
  School decile rank n (area-level socio-economic status) 6 (medium)             4 (medium)              4 (medium)             2 (low)
  Sex (%)
    Girl                                                  50                     49                      53                     52
    Boy                                                   50                     51                      47                     48
  Ethnicity (%)
    European/P<U+FFFD> akeh<U+FFFD>a                                    48                     38                      42                     19
    M<U+FFFD>aori                                                29                     53                      42                     74
    Pacific                                               3                      4                       6                      7
    Asian                                                 16                     4                       9                      1
    MELAA                                                 3                      1                       0                      0
    Other                                                 1                      1                       1                      0
  School year (%)
    Year 3                                                15                     0                       17                     14
    Year 4                                                19                     0                       17                     17
    Year 5                                                15                     0                       13                     18
    Year 6                                                17                     0                       19                     16
    Year 7                                                3                      57                      3                      2
    Year 8                                                0                      43                      0                      0
Note. MELAA ¼ Middle Eastern/Latin American/African.
                                                                               4

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                    Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
Fig. 1. Proportion of trips to school by mode of travel, before (survey 1, 2) and after (survey 3) the opening of the shared path. Active mode
represents walking, cycling and scootering and mixed mode represents a mix of modes to get to school such as travelling to school by car
and walking.
3.3. Characteristics of participants
    Overall, 59 children from four schools participated in a total of 13 focus groups. Age and sex are detailed in Table 2. Phone in­
terviews with 35 parents and face-to-face interviews were conducted four with school representatives.
3.3.1. School travel mode
    Modes of travel reported by children in descending order of frequency were car, walk, scooter, bike and bus. Children also
frequently reported multiple modes of travel, including by car and walking, for example ‘My mum drops us off at her work and then we
walk up the bike track’.
3.4. Factors related to children’s travel mode to school
    In the sub-sections that follow, children, parent and school representative’s perceptions of active travel to school and the shared
Table 2
Demographic characteristics of focus group participants.
  Demographic characteristics             School A                 School B                School C                 School D                   Total
  Age
    12 years                                                       16                                                                          16
    11 years                              1                        2                                                                           3
    10 years                              5                                                5                        5                          15
    9 years                               4                                                8                        11                         23
    8 years                                                                                                         2                          2
  Sex
    Male                                  3                        7                       3                        5                          18
    Female                                7                        11                      10                       13                         41
  Total n                                 10                       18                      13                       18                         59
                                                                        5

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                    Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
path are presented. Quotations from participants were not identified by school in order to prevent discrimination and potential
stigmatisation based on socio-economic deprivation (Beddoe, 2014).
3.4.1. Convenience
    Convenience was a key factor related to children’s travel mode to school and included ease of dropping/collecting children to/from
work, family routine with trip chaining (dropping/collecting multiple children to different schools) and being time poor.
        ‘The reason for me is because I don’t live too far away, but then my dad will drop my sister off, my brother off, my big brother,
        and then he’d drop me and my little brother off, and then sometimes he ends up being late,’ (child).
    Additionally, the distance children and parents lived, both near and far from their school affected the travel mode to school.
        ‘Because we live far away, we have to go in the car because usually it’s too far because mum wants to keep us safe and stuff,’
        (child).
    Even if children lived close to school, some parents believed it was too far to walk on their own because of traffic and having to cross
a main highway.
        ‘Walking is usually when I’m free to be able to walk with them. If not, we go by car because […] just where we live, obviously if I
        sent them to walk on their own, I’d have to trust them to cross the main state highway and I don’t really feel like it’s safe enough
        for them to do that on their own … It kind of relies on an adult being able to do it with them … We’re really close. When we do
        walk, it’s only like a 20, 30-min walk,’ (parent).
    Most children from school A, were driven to school and reported living too far from the school, making it difficult for them to walk/
cycle. A number of parents that drove their child to school commented on the time it took to get to school, with and without traffic or
lights.
        ’It can take me six minutes door to door flat out driving fast, getting there fast. If the lights are going my way, we’re there in six
        minutes flat,’ (parent).
    Parents of children who walked to school also commented in terms of time to get to school, ranging from ‘2 min’ to ‘20 min’. In
addition, parents of children who lived within walking distance of the school also dropped their children to school sometimes,
irrelevant of time and distance to school.
        ’Walk most of the time, but sometimes car depending. We’re just not far from the school; around the corner,’ (parent).
3.4.2. Safety
    Safety was mentioned by children, parents and school representatives alike. Traffic, personal safety from others, dogs, and personal
injury arose frequently in all three groups. Safety from traffic included, crossing the road, fumes from exhausts, traffic volume and
speed. When referring to the new shared path the general consensus was that it is ‘a lot safer’ and ‘there’s not as many roads to cross,
there’s only like two, I think, something like that. You don’t have to cross as much.’ However, even though there are not many road and
train crossings along the path some children thought they were safe but others were unsure:
        ’it’s kind of like pretty safe except for the train crossing. But the gate is way more safe because it closes it. Some teenagers jump
        over the gate if it closes,’ (child).
    Opinions varied also in relation to the openness of the shared path on route to school and whether it was more or less safe. In
general children commented that using the path was safe because of its openness ‘I feel like it’s really safe […] It’s really open, I guess.’
However, some parents viewed the new path as unsafe because it was out of sight from the main road, with few people using it.
        ’He has used it a couple of times when I’ve dropped them further up X Street and he’s gone down back that way, but then I start
        worrying about [him] because he’s not on a main road if anything happens, no one’s going to see what happened if you know
        what I mean. It’s kind of a Catch-22 with both ways that he goes,’ (parent).
    All three groups (children, parents and school representatives) spoke about personal safety as a key factor related to AST. Children
commented that they sometimes felt afraid walking alone on the shared path to school, particularly when their school held school
assemblies instructing them to walk with a friend at all times because of ‘stranger danger’ in the community. It was unclear whether
this increased the sense of fear or heightened awareness in children walking/cycling to school.
        ’because the people at the school, they’ve told us many times that there’s creepy people out there, we could be attacked on the
        streets, you’ve got to be careful, walk with more people, don’t walk alone. So it’s a bit scary sometimes if you’re out alone
        because sometimes Alice doesn’t walk up [the shared path] if she has to go somewhere else for a change. Sometimes I’m just
        like, well now I don’t feel that safe walking up there alone,’ (child).
    Some parents preferred their children to use the main roads instead of the shared path and felt it was safer to be on a main road next
to lots of people and traffic.
        ’I told them to stick to the main roads. Some of the cycleway nobody can see you there. I know there’s thugs around that sort of
        hang out around those areas and they take advantages of little kids, so I just said to them [her children], if you can, stick to the
        main road where there’s lots of people, there’s lots of traffic. It’s less likely that anything bad will happen to you. I wouldn’t
        mind them using it if they were with an adult,’ (parent).
    Fear of strangers was also evident among the child and parent participants. Children from one school in particular, described a
                                                                         6

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                  Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
number of instances in the previous 18 months where strangers tried to abduct children from their school with lollipops and treats. The
story of ‘snatching’ children off the streets caused the effect of some parents driving their child to school for a number of months, when
usually their child would walk to school.
        ’One thing I don’t like when I’m walking is walking past people that are very, very weird and say, here, come with me, I’ll give
        you something, and I go like, nope,’ (child).
        ’It was last year when people were approaching children, trying to snatch them off the streets in X neighbourhood. I drove my
        kids to school for a couple of months. It’s just things like that. You hear about things,’ (parent).
    Parents also reflected on how times have changed negatively since they were a child and this perception impacts on whether or not
they allow their child to walk to school.
        ’it’s changed from when we were younger. It’s not safe to walk around. The amount of assaults and what not that you hear, it’s
        just … I don’t find it as safe as what it used to be when I was growing up. I remember walking around and it didn’t matter, but
        now you just can’t trust anyone, really, especially if you don’t know them,’ (parent).
    All three groups also commented on the negative presence of older high school teenagers on the shared path on route to/from
school. Children mentioned high school kids would intimidate them by calling them names and/or attacking them.
        ’[a friend] was riding his bike once and some kid pretended to throw a rugby ball at him … they think we’re easy targets,’
        (child).
        ’some call out rude things behind you as you’re just walking, so they’ll just say something inappropriate or weird as you’re
        walking away,’ (child).
    Parents also mentioned instances of older kids stealing younger kid’s bikes on the way to school. School representatives mentioned
a number of events and issues with high school kids affecting younger school kids on the shared path, for example, selling drugs,
skipping school and ‘pashing’ (kissing).
        ’I don’t know how threatened our kids feel because it’s away from everything. If there were more adults using it and people and
        busier, I think it would be better because people would feel safer, particularly kids,’ (school representative).
3.4.3. Fun
    The idea that the shared path was ‘fun’ was a key factor mentioned by children going by active modes to school. The design of the
path infrastructure was fun to walk, bike or scooter on. Many children commented it was ‘fun’, ‘nice and smooth’, and described the
path as having ‘great concrete’ which made ‘it really easy to rollerblade on’. Some children commented that they liked going to school
by car, because they got to play games on their phone, ‘I like going in the car because I get to play on my phone’, or they got to play with
their siblings, ‘I like going in cars because I can play with my little brother.’ The fun and enjoyment of the journey to school often
overlapped with the themes under the heading the social environment. This is discussed in more detail below.
3.4.4. Health benefits
    All three groups noted a number of health benefits to walking, biking or scootering to/from school. Parents who accompanied their
child to school also recognised the health benefits for themselves, ‘it helps with her exercising. It helps with my exercise as well.’
Feelings of calmness, relaxation and being in a good mood were key factors mentioned in relation to active travel to school. Children
commented on the presence or absence of sound while on their route to/from school. Those who travelled actively enjoyed the
quietness of the path, absent of traffic and in nature.
        ’There’s no loud noise. It’s just sort of really calm and enjoyable,’ (child).
        ’If you walk out there [next to the main road], you can hear the cars go past, but if you’re walking on the path it’s nice and quiet
        sometimes. And it’s out in nature. It’s just nice. You can enjoy it,’ (child).
3.4.5. Social environment
        There were a number of social benefits mentioned by parents and children in relation to commuting to school by active travel,
        car or bus. Regardless of travel mode, social benefits to children such as spending time with parents, talking with friends and
        playing with siblings were all key factors mentioned in relation to travel mode to school.
        ’I enjoy walking to school because I get to socialise with my friends,’ (child).
        ’We talk about what’s happening at school and what’s going on at school,’ (child driven by car to school with their mum).
        ’They walk with a group of friends and we know a lot of people around from here to school,’ (parent).
    Some children who travelled by car commented on the social environment as annoying at times especially in relation to their
parent’s music selection, annoying siblings and dogs misbehaving.
        ’My brother always pulls my hair in the car.’
        ’When I have to sit next to my brother and he farts.’
                                                                      7

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                  Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
        ’I sit next to my sister and she yells in my ear.’
    Parents of children using both active travel and car modes, enjoyed spending time with them and commented it was valuable ‘one-
on-one’ time. A parent that drove their child to school commented ‘I like it. It’s a good time for us to catch up in the morning. We have a
big chat about what the day ahead is.’ While a parent that walked with their child to school commented it’s good for them and their
daughter, ‘because she comes from a large family, it’s good for her to have that one-on-one time with her mum as well […] we get to
talk about the day and what not.’
3.4.6. Weather and environment
    The weather, such as the presence or absence of rain or hot sun was a key factor related to children’s travel to school. Generally,
children who walked, biked or scootered to school were more or less happy to do so when the weather was fine and dry. However, there
were exceptions such as:
        ’When I’m walking up there in summer and I’m just like dying in the heat and there’s just this one tree that I’ll walk under for
        about two minutes just walking as slowly as I can just because it gives off so much shade,’ (child).
    However, when it rained both parents and children usually went to school by car. For example, one parent commented, ‘While the
weather’s fine, absolutely. When it rains, that’s when I will take the children to school in the car.’
    Appreciation of, and care for the natural environment was also related to children’s travel mode to school. Children reflected that
‘walking was good for the environment’ and there’s ‘less pollution’ created than going by car to school. Some children also enjoyed
walking past trees and flowers on the way to school, one child commented ‘I like walking past trees because they look nice. They have
flowers that I really like and sometimes I want to pick some flowers and take them to school.’
3.5. Improvements
    A number of the improvements suggested by participants related to each of the themes described in detail above. Convenience:
Parents and children suggested painting a line down the middle of the shared to improve efficiency and blockages by high school kids
across the width of the shared path. The middle line could be used to create two one-way systems, separate walkers and cyclists and
also speed up getting to/from school. Some children also suggested putting signs at different points along the shared path with distance
in kilometres to destinations in town ‘which would encourage people to walk through and stuff.’ Safety: All groups gave many sug­
gestions on ways to improve both actual safety and perception of safety from others along the shared path such as path lighting and
increased security cameras. Additionally, parents and school representatives also suggested police or volunteers patrol the path (via
walking, biking or on an electric scooter) before and after school hours to increase the perception of safety among children and parents.
Other suggestions to improve safety included, warning lights to slow down cars approaching intersections along the path between the
road and train tracks and having different school start and end times to the high schools along the shared path, to avoid negative
incidences with high school children. Fun: Children in particular gave a number of suggestions to make the shared path more fun for
their commute to school. Examples included, more interesting paintings and art such as ‘swirls, unicorns, stars, rainbows, and spirals’,
a rock climbing wall, and playgrounds with ‘some kids paintings of what they want to be when they grow up’ because as one child
commented ‘the footpath’s a little boring when you walk past. You only see schools and that, and you want something more fun.’
Health benefits: All three groups recommended installing water fountains and benches along the shared path. Having ‘more places you
can take a break’ and ‘benches for people to sit and rest if they needed to’ (parent) and not having to ‘carry around a drink bottle […] so
you can just have a drink’ (child) were key recommendations by parents and children. Weather and environment: In relation to the
weather and walking/biking along the shared path, children in particular suggested ‘more shade’ from the sun because ‘it’s a lot nicer
riding or walking in shade as it gets really hot,’ and also ‘some shelter somewhere because there’s no shelter and if it starts to rain you
can’t go anywhere.’ All groups recommended installing rubbish bins along the shared path. One child commented on their frustration
of not having bins along the path ‘I’ve had rubbish and I’ve really wanted to put it in a bin but then I can’t. There’s no bins until you get
onto the road.’
4. Discussion
    The aim of this research was to advance understanding of the impact of infrastructural improvements on travel modes to school by
triangulating perspectives from children, parents and school representatives. Travel modes to school were mixed across the four
schools and differed by school type and decile (area-level socio-economic status). For example, nearly 90% of children attending the
private (and highest decile) school in this study, were driven to school (increasing 2% from pre to post-path), whereas less than 65% at
the lower decile school (D) were driven to school (down from 68% pre-path). This finding is consistent with a recent systematic review
on built environment associates of AST in NZ children and youth which found area-level socioeconomic status was negatively asso­
ciated with mode of travel to school (Ikeda et al., 2018). Increases in the proportion of AST in three out of the four schools surveyed (A,
B and D) from pre to post-path intervention while small (3%, 2% and 6%) are promising considering there was only 4 months between
pre and post evaluation. Furthermore, previous studies evaluating infrastructural interventions demonstrate that it can take time to see
behavioural change (Goodman et al., 2014).
    In line with previous research, parental perspectives on convenience of travel to school in terms of time and distance (McDonald
and Aalborg, 2009), trip chaining and family routine (Faulkner et al., 2010) were all important factors related to children’s AST.
Findings from this study highlight the complexity of decision making for parents around AST and their role as ‘gatekeepers’ (Mah et al.,
                                                                      8

N. Donnellan et al.                                                                                 Journal of Transport & Health 17 (2020) 100838
2017). Consistent with previous research (Ikeda et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2018), parents’ perceptions of safety from traffic and
strangers continued to influence their decision on their child’s commute mode to school, irrespective of the new shared path.
    Children and school representatives also expressed concerns about safety from traffic and strangers along the route to school.
Schools held assemblies regarding safety and warned children to always walk in pairs and some children felt afraid to walk on their
own along the new shared path to/from school. An interesting finding from this research is that most children felt the ‘openness’ of the
shared path improved their perception of safety from both traffic and strangers, however some parents still regarded the new shared
path as unsafe because it was ‘out of sight’ from the main road and strangers could still ‘take advantage of little kids’. School rep­
resentatives also commented on the quietness and lack of other people in the community using the shared path during the times
children walk and cycle to/from school and that high school teenagers at times negatively impacted younger children walking/cycling
to school along the shared path.
    Children also commented on the fun aspect of their commute to school. Active travel on the shared path to school was enjoyable
because of the smoothness of path for walking, cycling and rollerblading. Children that travelled by car to school enjoyed playing
games on their phone or with their siblings. Our findings are consistent with the limited studies that have reported on fun and
enjoyment of active travel to school (Fusco et al., 2012; Romero, 2015). Specific neighbourhood attributes with natural elements,
recreational amenities and retail spaces are places where children can experience fun and derive much pleasure (Egli et al., 2019;
Romero, 2015). Romero argues that neglecting the ‘sensory, playful, autonomous and social facets of what children consider’ as being
fun, ‘would be to misrepresent children’s walk to school’ (Romero, 2015).
    Consistent with previous research, (Egli et al., 2019; Hinckson, 2016; Race et al., 2017; Zwerts et al., 2010) all three groups in this
study described a number of health and social benefits of commuting to school such as exercising, socialising with friends and spending
time with family. Similar to other studies (Fusco et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2018), parents and children also mentioned that the weather
and environment impacted on their decision to walk/bike to school or take the car.
4.1. Study strengths
    A strength of this study is the multiple methods approach that included measuring travel to school at multiple time points before
and after an infrastructural intervention and the qualitative approach to include three different perspectives (child, parent and school
representative) to gain a comprehensive understanding of the factors related to travel mode to school. Another strength was the
triangulation of infrastructural and ‘soft’ recommendations from children, parents and school representatives to improve the acces­
sibility, utility and safety of the new shared path. The suggestion from parents and school representatives of having volunteers or police
patrol the shared path during the times children walk or bike to/from school is important to increase the perception of safety. While
these recommendations are specific to the study area, many of the ideas (such as providing benches, water fountains, rubbish bins,
cameras, painting art, planting flowers, trees) are of practical benefit for other towns in NZ looking to implement built environment
interventions to encourage AST. Another strength of the study was the level of engagement from each of the four schools, and the
enthusiasm to collaborate with the local council to improve the environment for active travel to school.
4.2. Study limitations
    This was a repeat cross-sectional study and as such does not provide an understanding of the longitudinal effects of the shared path
on travel behaviours. In addition, hands-up surveys were not completed by all four schools at every stage, however surveys were
completed before and after the opening of the shared path for all schools. Address data were not collected and therefore we were
unable to determine differences in distance to the intervention (shared path) or if the path was a relevant route for children that walked
or biked to school. However, because we collected data on all travel modes to school we were able to include children that came by car
and also used the path.
4.3. Implications for future research
    The unique triangulation of children, parents and school representative’s perspectives is a novel contribution to research on AST. A
number of insights and real-world examples of how to make infrastructural interventions more attractive, fun, interesting and
accessible were highlighted in this study and have implications for urban and town planners and active school travel policy makers.
Future research on AST should aim to include perspectives from multiple stakeholders (children, parents and school representatives)
that use infrastructure interventions. In addition, researchers should seek suggestions for improving AST interventions and commu­
nicate their findings with local councils.
5. Conclusion
    This study sought to understand factors related to travel mode to school through a child-centred approach that incorporates
children, their parents and school representative’s perspectives. Three out of four schools surveyed reported small but promising
increases in the proportion of AST from pre to post shared path intervention. Understanding multiple perspectives from children,
parents and school representatives’ revealed a number of factors related to children’s mode of travel to school. This study highlights
the importance of fun and the enjoyable aspects of children’s commute to school. In addition, children and parents from this study gave
practical recommendations to improve the aesthetics, accessibility, utility and safety of the shared path intervention that if acted upon,
                                                                      9

