  S20                                     Abstracts / Journal of Transport & Health 9 (2018) S1–S37
Conclusions: From our analysis and results, we recommend that the public and food industry stakeholders, in
particular, should be educated on the cost-effectiveness of the modern traceability implementation method
(RFID) over the traditional methods of food traceability.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2018.05.074
2377
What Contributes to High Rates of Active School Travel? Perspectives of Exemplar Schools
in New Zealand
               n
Greer Hawley ,1, Karen Witten 2, Melody Smith 3, Jamie Hosking 3
1
  Mackie Research, Auckland, New Zealand
2
  Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand
3
  University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Background: There are considerable benefits of active school travel (e.g., walking or cycling to school); ranging
from increases in children's physical activity and independent mobility, to broader population benefits of
reduced traffic congestion and carbon emissions. In industrialized nations, active school travel has declined in
the last 20 years, particularly in terms of cycling, and many countries are grappling with how to reverse this
trend through a combination of built environment, education, and marketing interventions.
In contrast to this general decline in active school travel, in New Zealand there are ‘exemplar’ schools that
have high rates of active school travel. This study investigated the experience and context of these exemplar
schools, through the lens of a socio-ecological model, to identify and understand success factors.
Methods: Urban exemplar schools were identified through local government contacts across New Zealand.
Selected schools had reported active school travel rates that were considerably higher than the New Zealand
national average of 31%, or high rates for a particular mode (e.g. cycling 411%).
Semi-structured key informant interviews were conducted with one or two school representatives. Interviews
explored: school culture, policies, and practices; local culture and norms; and perceptions of the school street
environment. Interviews were transcribed verbatim, followed by inductive and deductive thematic coding in
NVivo 10 to generate themes around facilitators for active school travel.
Results: Seven schools agreed to participate (of 12 approached) - three primary, three intermediate, and one
junior high school. Interview data suggest an interaction between: local community culture and values; school
culture, policies, and practices; and the built environment, whereby these factors continually reinforce each
other to contribute to higher rates of active travel. A local culture of physical activity was perceived to
naturally flow into more active school travel. Similarly, the promotion of active school travel in multiple
schools in the same community was a theme. For schools, the rationale for supporting active school travel was
that being physically active supported student learning; however, this support was conditional on a traffic
safety threshold being met.
Conclusions: Findings suggest that in addition to developing safer active travel routes to schools, a thorough
understanding of local culture and values, and school policies and priorities are needed. This will enable the
design of a context-specific mix of interventions to increase active school travel.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2018.05.075
2378
Bikes in Schools and Biking to School: Can One Support the Other?
               n
Greer Hawley ,1, Hamish Mackie 2, Richard Scott 1, Alistair Woodward 3, Natalie Hardaker 4
1
  Mackie Research, Auckland, New Zealand
2
  Mackie Research Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand

