Environment and Planning A 2012, volume 44, pages 1856 – 1874
doi:10.1068/a44549
The influence of school choice policy on active school
commuting: a case study of a middle-sized school
district in Oregon
Yizhao Yang, Steve Abbott, Marc Schlossberg
Department of Planning, Public Policy and Management, 1209 University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR 97403, USA; e-mail: yizhao@uoregon.edu, sma@uoregon.edu,
schlossb@uoregon.edu
Received 16 October 2011; in revised form 5 January 2012
Abstract. School choice policy has implications for school travel as it allows students to
attend schools farther from their residence than their neighborhood schools. This paper
uses a case study from Oregon to investigate how school choice affects parents’ school
travel decision making and the degree to which school choice affects children’s walking
or biking to school. The research shows that school choice is associated with lengthened
school travel distance and parents’ greater willingness to drive their children to school
even within a short distance. The research suggests that school choice could hinder the
effectiveness of such programs as Safe Routes to School.
Keywords: active school travel, school choice policy, Safe Routes to School Program
1 Introduction
Active school commuting (ASC) refers to children walking or biking to school. Over
forty years, the US has witnessed a precipitous decline in ASC rates among all student age
groups (Booth et al, 2003; McDonald, 2007; McDonald et al, 2011). Increased reliance on
automobiles for school travel has led to concerns over such environmental consequences
as greenhouse gas emission, air and water pollution, and traffic congestion (Dubay, 2003;
EPA, 2003; Ewing et al, 2004). There are also likely adverse health impacts on children
from a reduction in physical activities and limiting effects on children’s social and cognitive
development from car travel (Mackett et al, 2005; O’Brien and Gilbert, 2003; Sallis and
Owen, 1999; Strauss and Pollack, 2001). These concerns have prompted calls for public
interventions to increase rates of ASC and investigations of factors contributing to the
observed school travel behavioral change.
     While school travel research has revealed many environmental factors that help explain
the decline in children’s rates of ASC, studies show that some of these environmental
conditions (eg, long distance school travel and poor neighborhood walkability) exist partly
as an outcome of policy decisions. For example, many local-level and/or state-level policies
guiding school siting, sizing, and design promote construction of large schools at the urban
fringe, making school trips longer and areas surrounding school sites unsupportive of walking
or biking (McDonald, 2010).
     School choice, a policy that allows students to attend schools not nearest to their residence,
is widely adopted in many countries. This policy may have implications for ASC. Discussion
of the relationship between school choice and school travel has focused on the obvious
observation that school choice allows students to attend schools farther from their residence than
neighborhood schools, resulting in longer travel distances and greater demand for automobile
travel (Steiner et al, 2006). The available empirical research, although limited, suggests that

School choice policy on ASC                                                                  1857
the connection between school choice and school travel cannot be completely explained by the
long travel distance typically associated with school choice (Wilson et al, 2010).
     There is a need for systematic research investigating how school choice affects parents’
school travel-mode decision and the degree to which school choice affects active school travel.
Our study aims at filling these gaps. We report on a case study; a school district in Oregon
that implemented a school choice policy but that does not provide transportation for students
who avail themselves of that choice. Analyses using GIS and survey data were enriched by
qualitative information collected from parent focus groups, school board members, and local
planners. Our study contributes to the literature by connecting school choice with important
aspects of parents’ decision-making process. By examining school travel in the context of
school choice, this study also illuminates the challenges facing public interventions, such as
the Safe Routes to School programs, in achieving the goal of increasing the rates of ASC.
     This paper is organized in eight parts. Following the introduction, we briefly describe
the background of school choice policy, and summarize evidence from existing school travel
research. We discuss a conceptual framework that integrates this policy with other factors
in predicting children’s walking or biking to school before presenting our case study. We
conclude with a discussion of research findings and policy implications.
2 Policy background
School choice refers broadly to various policies and programs related to enrolment and
funding of schools, both public and private. Choice, in this context, refers to policies that
allow students to attend schools other than the school in the neighborhood in which they
reside. In the US this policy has historical associations with various social agendas, from
racial desegregation to school funding and bureaucratic reform (Ryan and Heise, 2002).
With the ascendance of conservative government in the 1980s, in both the US and the UK,
school choice justification expanded to include ‘free market’ economic theories introduced
by Milton Friedman in 1955 (The Economist 2007). The goal, broadly stated, is to increase
parents’ control over their child’s education, increasing ‘school quality’ by employing a ‘free
market’ competition between schools (Forman, 2005; Teelken, 1999). Parents’ right to choose
an education type for their children is recognized by several international treaties(1) and exists
in countries around the world (Teelken, 1999), though policy mechanisms vary widely. Since
the 1970s public funds have increasingly supported private schools in Australia (Cahill and
Gray, 2010); Chile adopted a national voucher plan in 1980 (McEwan and Carnoy, 2000); the
Education Reform Act of 1988 altered school funding and structure throughout the UK (West
and Pennell, 1997), to cite just a few examples.
     Federal legislation has increasingly defined policies for US schools for decades,
beginning with Ronald Reagan’s Educational Reform, later codified by the “G.I. Bill for
Children” (Cookson, 1994; Maddaus, 1990; Scott, 2005). The No Child Left Behind Act of
2001 (NCLB, 2003) allows choice of alternative schools when neighborhood schools do not
meet defined performance metrics (McDonald, 2010). By 2007, 15% of US school children
attended public schools of choice and nearly every state had some form of school choice
option.(2)
(1) The UN adopted Universal Declaration of Human Rights for example (Article 26, paragraph 3,
1948).
(2) Obtained from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d09/tables/dt09_039.asp

1858                                                                  Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
     Generally, school choice programs include three types of choices: alternative public
schools such as charter (3) and/or magnet (4) schools, neighborhood schools outside one’s
neighborhood (intradistrict), or public schools outside the school district (interdistrict). Some
students attend private schools that are publicly funded, or for which some financial support
exists such as vouchers or tax credits. (McEwan and Carnoy, 2000; Scott, 2005; Teelken,
1999; Tice et al, 2006; Young and Clinchy, 1992).
     Debate over school choice policy implementation has evolved around several themes,
ranging from its effectiveness in reducing segregation (Allen, 2007, Frankenberg et al, 2010;
Garcia, 2008; Renzulli and Evans, 2005), encouraging ‘market mechanisms’ and educational
innovation (Ledwith, 2010; Miller-Kahn and Smith, 2001; Teelken, 1999), and improving
student performance (McEwan and Carnoy, 2000). Equitable access, however, has emerged
as an unintended policy consequence. Critics see school choice as favoring those with time,
money, and information resources, and as widening the divide between privileged and
disadvantaged families (Burgess and Briggs, 2010). School transportation, in particular, can
be a barrier to school choice among low-income families (Teske et al, 2009).
     Related to equity concerns, and extending to environmental and health issues, are effects
of school choice on transportation. Such effects are evidenced where school choice exists
without school bussing, making parents who exercise choice responsible for their children’s
transportation. Increased travel distance can make walking or biking to school impractical.
School choice, with its possible influences on redefining the social functions of school and
the meaning of school travel, encourages the use of personal automobiles for school trips.
This transportation theme has received inadequate attention and is understudied both in the
school choice debate and in the school travel literature.
3 Research on active school commuting—a brief summary
3.1 Environmental-level and individual-level determinants
Studies of factors potentially affecting parents’ use of ASC have informed the development
of strategies to increase rates of ASC. Environmental-level and individual-level determinants
have been identified, and can be summarized as related to built environment conditions
(eg, distance to school, walkability, and land-use mix), social context (eg, safety, sense of
community, and socioeconomic status), parental/family characteristics (eg, car ownership,
family income, and employment status), and children’s characteristics (eg, gender and age).
An extensive literature review of active school travel can be found in Sirard and Slater (2008),
McMillan (2005), and Wilson et al (2010).
      Sirard and Slater (2008) noted that prominent psychological constructs such as attitudes,
expectancies, beliefs, and social norms have been insufficiently explored in school travel
research. Few studies have addressed the important role played by parents’ preferences and
attitudes in predicting their decision to allow children to walk or bike to school. These studies
show that parents’ environmental attitudes (Black et al, 2001), their beliefs regarding health
and environmental benefits associated with ASC (Yang and Markowitz, forthcoming), and
the perceived value of their children’s socialization with others (McMillan, 2007) increase
parents’ incentives to use active school travel. Rodriguez and Vogt (2009) explored children’s
attitudes, measured as semantic differential scales (ie, fun/boring, safe/not safe), in their
decision to walk or bike to school.
(3) Charter schools are a form of alternative public school. They are publicly funded but are organized
to achieve a unique set of accountabilities and are thus exempt from some of the statutes that apply to
other schools.
(4) Magnet schools, which began in the late 1960s in the US as counter to segregation, have continued
as alternative public schools offering a technical or specialized curriculum.

School choice policy on ASC                                                                 1859
3.2 School-level characteristics affecting school travel
Recent studies have also examined school-level characteristics, such as school age, size, and
location. Most school-level conditions are considered to impact on school travel via their
connection with environmental characteristics. Thus when environmental characteristics
such as home–school distance or walkability are taken into consideration, the direct impacts
of school-level characteristics do not appear discernible. For example, Ewing et al (2004)
suggest no direct effects of school size on ASC after school environmental characteristics
have been controlled for.
    School policies, such as start/end time, parking, school choice, and policies against/
encouraging walking/biking, also affect school travel. Some impacts are obvious—policies
that prohibit or discourage children from walking or biking to school lead fewer children
to do so. The National Center for Safe Routes to School (no date) has launched an effort to
identify and overcome those ‘barrier’ policies. School choice policy effects are most likely
explained through many aforementioned environmental conditions or characteristics.
    We are aware of only one research project in the US that has studied the impacts of
school choice on school travel. Using data collected from schools in St Paul and Roseville,
MN, multiple publications based on this research project suggest that school choice increased
travel distance and reduced ASC by encouraging bus or auto transport (Wilson et al, 2008);
transportation costs were significantly higher and rates of active school travel lower when
the school choice scenario was modeled versus a scenario in which all students attended their
neighborhood school (Marshall et al, 2010); and school choice could significantly reduce the
impact that Safe Routes to School programs might otherwise have on increasing levels of
active school travel (Marshall et al, 2010).
    Findings from the Minnesota study, however, suggest that school choice may affect travel-
mode choice independent of school travel distance. Regression models indicate that, after
controlling for variables such as school-trip distance, car ownership, and other environmental
conditions, discouraging impacts on children walking or biking to school are still discernible
(Wilson et al, 2010). The authors stopped short of providing an explanation. School choice
policy may possibly be associated with other factors relevant to active school travel. Our
goal is to fill the research gap by examining the role of school choice in parents’ school travel
decision-making process.
4 Studying the effects of school choice policy on ASC
4.1 A conceptual framework
We start by developing a conceptual framework that comprehensively outlines possible
pathways from school choice to school travel behavior. We build our framework on the
basis of the Ecological and Cognitive Active Commuting Framework (ECAC) developed by
Sirard and Slater (2008). According to the ECAC model, policies operate at the first level;
their impacts on the frequency of ASC are mitigated via their influences both on physical
conditions and on social contexts encompassing school and residential environments
(neighborhood level), which then influence parental perceptions and school travel decision-
making processes (parent/family level). Family sociodemographic characteristics, such
as income and education level, not only can affect the use of ASC directly but also may
moderate relationships between school policies and physical and social environmental
characteristics.
    We summarize the effects of school choice policy on school travel behavior via two
paths—first, the policy affects school travel via its connection with such environmental
factors as home–school distance, social qualities (eg, safety and sense of community), and
neighborhood walkability; second, school choice could affect parents’ school travel decision-
making process, and may even influence parents’ internal desire to use active school travel

1860                                                               Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
such as their attitudes or preferences. The first pathway appears intuitive, and has been the
only pathway considered in the current research. The second pathway is subtle, and has not
been elaborated and empirically examined.
     We hypothesize that school choice could affect the more subtle, psychological factors
(such as preferences, attitudes, and intentions) in parents’ decision-making dynamics. School
choice was “designed to put parents in the role of educational consumers, shopping for
the best ‘product’ from among a variety of public schooling options” (Dodenhoff, 2007).
It may encourage parents to treat school as a place for education consumption and school
travel as a means only to reach the educational goal. This potentially reduces the perceived
local interaction, health, and environmental values associated with school travel. Findings
from several empirical studies suggest that parents’ perceived value of school travel as a
mechanism for local social interactions and getting to know their neighborhoods motivates
them to allow their children to walk or bike to school (eg, McMillan, 2007; Yang and
Markowitz, forthcoming). We thus contend that school choice may reduce parents’ desire to
use ASC. Some researchers call for a ‘community school’ that focuses on local service as a
strategy for increasing active school travel (McDonald, 2010).
4.2 Research questions
In the following section, we present a case study to improve our understanding of how school
choice affects ASC—especially to detect psychologically related effects. We use the case
study to answer the following questions:
(1) To what degree does school choice contribute to an increase in school travel distance?
(2) How is school choice policy associated with parents’ consideration of ASC upon their
housing location choice and attitude toward ASC?
(3) How are the effects of school choice policy on ASC indirectly caused by the environmental
(external) and attitudinal (internal) factors?
5 Research design
5.1 A case-study approach
Given the complexity of the issue in question and the fact that our conceptual framework
attempts to integrate multiple evidence sources in its conceptualization of school choice
policy effects on ASC, we adopt a case-study approach, making our research illustrative and
exploratory. While single case studies may present problems of generalizability, they do offer
several advantages over research design involving multiple research sites. These advantages
include easy access to research subjects, use of multiple data sources, and opportunities to
develop a good understanding of the context (Campbell, 2003).
     We used the 4J School District, a mid-sized district in Eugene, OR, as our study area.
We limited our study population to those families living in the city of Eugene, focusing on
parents of young children attending elementary schools.(5) This decision was based on our
belief that the process of moving ‘for schools’ is likely to start when a family chooses an
elementary school and that environmental conditions impose greater impacts on children’s
ability to use ASC at younger ages. These conditions together provide an opportunity to
investigate the effects of school choice policy on ASC through its impact on school travel
distance and parents’ attitude.
(5) Elementary school (also known as primary school) in the US generally refers to kindergarten (a year
of schooling that precedes compulsory grades) through grades 5 (roughly ages 5 to 10 years).

School choice policy on ASC                                                                           1861
Table 1. Elementary school types in city of Eugene, OR.
Type of school         Number of           Attendance        Attendance method School transportation
                       schools (2007–      boundary
                       08 enrollment)
Neighborhood           18                  yes               assigned based on     available for students
school by              (3526)                                residence             living 1 mile and
residence                                                                          beyond from school
Choice school
    Neighborhood       18                  outside one’s     school-districtwide   no school bus
    school by          (840)               neighborhod       lottery process,      provided (exceptions
    choice                                                   limited by space      can be made)
                                                             availability
    Alternative        8                   no                school-districtwide   no school bus
    school             (1231)                                lottery process,      provided (exceptions
                                                             limited by space      can be made)
                                                             availability
      There are twenty-six public elementary schools in the District; eighteen neighborhood
schools with assignment/attendance boundaries, and eight alternative (magnets, language
immersion, charter)(6) schools without defined attendance boundaries. A lottery-based school
choice program began in the early 1970s (Lawson, 1985).(7) Students may attend any of
the eight alternative schools, or any neighborhood school not associated with the student’s
neighborhood, by choice, if space is available.
      Approximately 6000 students enrolled in the twenty-six elementary schools for the 2007–
08 school year. Of our study population, 2071 students (37%) exercised school choice. The
majority (22%) attended alternative schools. The rest (15%) attended neighborhood schools
not connected to their geographic residence. Only students who attend their neighborhood
school, and live more than 1.6 km from school, are eligible for the bus service.(8) Students
attending schools through the choice program must provide their own transportation. Table 1
describes the school types available in the study area, and figure 1 displays the geographic
distribution of all twenty-six schools in our study.
(6) Language immersion school refers to schools where students learn a second language in an ‘immersion’
environment, namely the target language is used as a teaching tool, surrounding or ‘immersing’ students
in their learning experience.
(7) Should transfer requests exceed openings at a school then student transfer requests are pooled for a
‘lottery drawing’. Students that live in a school’s zoned attendance area have a higher priority to attend
a school than those living outside the area. Other factors are considered as well for establishing priority.
These may include the fact that a student’s sibling(s) already attend the school of choice, the proximity
of parents’ workplace, childcare arrangements, or special or bilingual educational needs of the student.
(8) The School district transportation policy has some nuance. In general, elementary students are
eligible to use the school bus only if they live within the neighborhood boundary of the school they
attend, and live more than 1.6 km from the school. The actual written policy reads that “parents will be
responsible for transportation to and from school unless space is available on a district bus traveling
to that school", so it seems that there is flexibility. Exceptions can also be made to the 1.6 km rule if
it is deemed unsafe to walk, or if the child has special needs. The special needs exception also applies
to special needs students who attend schools outside of their neighborhood boundary. These students
may ride the bus to their school of choice, and a sibling of an IEP (Individualized Education Program)
student who rides the bus to a school of choice is also eligible to ride the bus to the same school,
subject to space availability.

1862                                                              Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
            Elementary school catchment area
            Eugene boundary
            4J Neighborhood of elementary schools
            4J Alternative elementary schools
Figure 1. Location of elementary schools in 4J District, Eugene, OR.
5.2 Data sources
We utilize two data sources in our quantitative analysis. One is a GIS database that maps the
location of each of 5597 students in city of Eugene, the student’s school of actual attendance,
and the student’s residence-based neighborhood school. The other data were collected from
a survey sample of 1123 families of elementary school students, sent to all 5597 families
in 2008. The eight-page survey includes questions about school travel/commuting patterns,
about location choice in the context of school choice program availability, important factors
that parents consider in their location choice, and a series of questions aimed at assessing
parents’ attitude toward ASC. Parents returned 1197 surveys. Discounting 126 nondeliverable
surveys, the response rate was 21%. While not high, this return rate is comparable with other
school travel studies (eg, Wilson et al, 2010). Of the returned surveys, 1123 cases have valid
information for most variables or measures for this study.
    Additionally, before and after conducting our survey, we carried out formal and informal
interviews with parents, school officials, and local real estate agents that helped us design and
interpret our survey. We collected rich qualitative information from three focus groups with
parents regarding school travel habits, parents’ reasoning behind such habits, and residential
location decisions. We also conducted separate interviews with thirteen key informants
knowledgeable about schools, residential location decisions, and transportation, including
real estate professionals, planners, school administrators, and community members. Text,
comprising 20 000 words transcribed from comments to an open-ended survey question,
afforded us content analysis. This information enriched our interpretation of analysis findings
and enlightened our policy-related discussion.
5.3 Analysis plan
As described earlier, this research explores the mechanism by which school choice may
influence parents’ decisions to use ASC. We analyzed the two datasets in three steps to answer
our research questions.
    First, for the entire school district, and using the GIS dataset, we investigated the degree
to which an increase in commute distance is attributable to school choice. We compared two

School choice policy on ASC                                                                        1863
types of distances computed for each of the students in the study population. One distance
is between a student’s home and attended school. The other is between a student’s home and
‘neighborhood’ school. Both distances were computed, using GIS, along the street network.
In the absence of a school choice option these two distances should be the same. We expect to
see that school choice has, for some students, resulted in lengthened home–school distance.
     Second, using the survey data, we conducted analyses examining parents’ consideration
of school location and school travel in relation to their knowledge and use of a school
choice option. We examined correlations between school choice and parents’ school travel
considerations and attitudes. The construction of attitudinal measures is described below,
with the analysis results.
     Finally, we ran a series of logistic regression models to assess the direct effects of school
choice policy on ASC after controlling for important environmental and attitudinal factors.
6 Findings
To gauge the representativeness of our survey sample, we compare the sample with our study
population along several dimensions (see table 2). This comparison suggests that our sample
was reasonably representative of our study population. However, students from the alternative
schools were overrepresented. Alternative school students are 30% of the sample, compared
with 23% in the population.(9) Families with children attending choice schools have higher
family income and higher educational attainment levels. Median family income for the
three school types is US $60 000 for neighborhood school, US $69 065 for neighborhood
choice schools, and US $78 399 for alternative schools. The percentage of families with
postgraduate education is 32% for neighborhood school, 48% for neighborhood choice
school, and 46.8% for alternative school.
Table 2. Demographic comparison between population and sample.
Demographic                        GIS data      Survey sample
                                   (N = 5597)    (N = 1123)
Type of school (%)
    Neighborhood                        63            55
    Neighborhood by choice              15            15
    Alternative                         23            30
Family income: median (US $)    $$  60 157       62 500
Race/ethnicity: white (%)               71            78
Housing type: own (%)                   74            75
6.1 Active school commuting by school types
Sample rates of walking or biking to school are as follows (see table 3): about 33% of students
(32.9%) walked or biked to school at least one day a week, and nearly 14% (13.5%) did so
at least three days a week. Children walked or biked when leaving school, at least one day
a week, more frequently than for trips to school, consistent with other studies (Wilson et al,
2007). ASC use as the primary travel means (ie, walking or biking to school more than three
days a week) showed similar frequency for trips arriving and leaving schools.
     A closer look at ASC rates by school type reveals interschool discrepancies in travel
modes. ASC use as the primary mode is 17.3% for neighborhood residence schools, compared
with 6.4% for neighborhood choice schools, and 8.0% for alternative schools. The dominance
(9) To correct the oversampling of the alternative school families, we constructed a weight variable and
applied it to analysis with the sample data. The analysis findings reported in the subsequent tables,
unless otherwise noted, are computed based on weighted values.

1864                                                                   Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
Table 3. School travel mode and frequency by school type.
School travel model and frequency, %        Overall       School type
                                                          neighborhood neighborhood by alternative
                                                                          choice
Arriving school
Walk/bike at least 1 day a week             32.9          39.2            21.4                 23.9
Walk/bike > 3 days a week                   13.5          17.3             6.4                  8.0
Ride bus > 3 days a week                    25.6          37.7            12.1                  2.3
Ride car > 3 days a week                    57.2          42.5            77.5                 83.3
Leaving school
Walk/bike at least 1 day a week             43.9          49.4            35.8                 34.8
Walk/bike > 3 days a week                   13.0          16.5             5.8                  8.3
Ride bus > 3 days a week                    28.2          40.3            18.5                  2.6
Ride car > 3 days a week                    49.2          36.9            60.1                 74.4
of driving as the primary travel mode to and leaving school is apparent for the two types of
choice schools. More than 80% of alternative school students and more than 77% of children
attending neighborhood school by choice were driven to school more than three days a week.
This number was only 42% for neighborhood school students.
6.2 Effects of school choice on school travel distance
The average home–school distance for the 5597 elementary students in our study population
is about 2.8 km. Slightly more than 60% of students live beyond 1.6 km from school. But
home–school distance varies greatly by school types. The average home-school distance
for students attending their own neighborhood schools is 1.9 km. The numbers for choice
schools are much higher—4.15 km for alternative school students and 4.49 km for students
attending other neighborhood schools of choice.(10)
      Figure 2 shows that, while the proportions of students living very close to their schools (eg,
< 0.40 km) did not vary dramatically among the three school types, substantial interschool-
type disparities exist in the proportions of students living far from schools (eg, > 1.6 km).
Nine out of ten students who opted to attend neighborhood schools other than their own lived
beyond 1.6 km from their schools. Alternative school students fared slightly better, with eight
of ten students living beyond 1.6 km from their schools. The majority (52.9%) of students
attending their own neighborhood school lived within 1.6 km.
      These distance estimates suggest that parents who used the school choice option for their
children traveled substantially farther than those who sent their children to neighborhood
schools. If every family drove to school, the choice-school families would drive 25% more
in total distance than all those neighborhood-school families, even though the choice-school
families only account for a third of the population. We calculated school travel distance for
a scenario in which all students attended neighborhood schools associated with their current
(10) It should be noted that school choice policy potentially enables school trips of shorter distances as
well. This is because school boundary delineation sometimes assigns students to schools that are not
the one closest to their home. In delineating school service zones, school districts often face the need
to balance facility capacity, student body diversity, feeder pattern, school bus route effectiveness, and
proximity. It should be noted that not every student who exercised school choice went to a school that
was farther from his or her residence than his or her assigned neighborhood school. Slightly less than
13% (12.8%) of alternative students and about 20% (20.7%) of students would have traveled a longer
distance if they had to attend their assigned neighborhood schools. In fact, in some places, attending a
closer school is a driving force for some parents’ use of the school choice option, and ‘shorter distance’
is one of criteria determining school choice admissions (eg, some school districts in State of Montana).

School choice policy on ASC                                                                         1865
                 100   Neighborhood   Neighborhood                  Alternative
                       schools        schools by choice             schools
                 80
Percentage (%)
                 60
                 40
                 20
                  0
                           G 0.4              0.4–0.8                     0.8–1.6      >1.6
                                                          Distance (km)
 Figure 2. School travel distance by school types.
 residence. Our analysis shows that, for the whole district, average school travel distance
 would be 1.9 km under this scenario. In other words, without the school choice option total
 school travel distance would be reduced by nearly 32%.(11)
 6.3 Effects of school choice on travel mode consideration and parent attitudes
 Parents’ initial consideration of active school travel and their attitude toward this travel means
 both have important influence on their choice of ASC (Yang et al, 2011, Yang and Markowitz,
 forthcoming). These are subtle psychological effects that are difficult to detect and verify.
 We explored these effects through a series of analyses. First, we examined how parents
 considered different school travel means upon their residence choice in relation to school
 types. Second, we investigated whether parents using different schools assigned differing
 weights to aspects concerning ASC in their housing location choice. Third, we compared
 parents’ attitude toward ASC vis-à-vis school types directly. Since information used in the
 first and second analyses mainly came from retrospective answers, we included in these
 analyses only those families who had moved to their current residence in the past two years
 (ie, recent movers).
      Of 346 recent mover families, 75% indicated that they were aware of the school choice
 option when making their location decision, 40% indicated that school choice had influenced
 their decision-making process, and 27% answered that they would not have chosen their
 current residence had the choice policy not been in effect.
      Our survey asked parents to report any school travel means they had considered when
 choosing their current residence, regardless of what travel mode they later adopted. Compared
 among the three types of schools, the difference in percentages of parents who considered
 ASC is not distinctive—35.1% for neighborhood schools, 33.3% for neighborhood schools
 by choice, and 33.3% for alternative schools. Parents of alternative school students were far
 more likely to consider using car travel alone for school trips (40.0%), compared with parents
 of own-neighborhood school students (15.2%).
      Recognizing that consideration of travel means may be made after a housing location
 decision, and may be affected strongly by parents’ perceived school travel distance and also
 various kinds of resources available to them (eg, number of cars owned), we computed partial
 correlations between school travel means considered and different school types, controlling
 for school travel distance and number of cars owned. Table 4 reports the partial correlation
 coefficients. There is no statistically significant correlation between the consideration of ASC
 and school type. Parents using alternative schools were clearly more likely to consider car
 (11) Ofcourse, this estimation does not consider the possibility of residential relocation as a result of
 policy change. Our survey indicated that a sizeable portion of parents would not have chosen their
 current location had the school choice option not been available. More research in this area is needed.

1866                                                                          Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
travel (r = 0.203, p < 0.001), compared with those opting for their own neighborhood schools
(r = <U+2012>0.234, p < 0.001) in the context of comparable travel distance and number of cars
owned by a family.
     Our survey asked parents to assess the importance level of twenty-one factors related to
housing, neighborhood, and accessibility to various services that they were likely to consider
in their housing choice. Four of these factors are environment/neighborhood elements closely
related to ASC—proximity to school, walkability of the neighborhood, pedestrian and biking
safety of the environment, and suitability for a child to walk or bike to school. We compared
parents’ answers and the ranking of these elements among all factors by school type. Figure 3
shows the mean importance scores for the four elements by school type. And again, the
analysis focuses on recently moved families (ie, moved within the past two years).
     No statistically significant difference exists among the mean importance scores for
two elements—neighborhood walkability and safety for walking and biking. For all three
school types, the mean importance scores are close to or above 3, meaning parents on
average considered these environmental conditions as being important when choosing their
residence. What distinguishes these three types of schools was parents’ assessment of the
importance of the element “proximity to school”. Parents of neighborhood-residence school
students assigned much higher importance level to this element (mean = 3.24) than parents
of neighborhood-choice school students (mean = 2.70) and of alternative school students
(mean = 2.61). Similarly, the neighborhood quality captured in “ability for my child to walk/
Table 4. Partial correlation (controlling for school travel distance and number of cars owned by house-
hold) between school type and school travel means considered (N = 338).
School type                                    School travel means considered when choosing current
                                               residence
                                               walk/bike        bus             car               did not think
Neighborhood schools                           -0.023            0.351***        -0.234***        -0.092**
Choice school
   Neighborhood schools by choice              -0.053           -0.077            0.060             0.011
   Alternative schools                           0.069          -0.316***         0.203***          0.091*
*p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p < 0.01.
                                      Alternative      Neighborhood school         Neighborhood
                                      school           by choice                   school
                                                                  2.27
Ability for my child to walk/bike                                  2.29
                        to school                                          2.58
                                                                           2.61
             Proximity to school                                              2.70
                                                                                             3.24
                                                                                                    3.47
     Pedestrian and biking safety                                                                     3.51
                                                                                                       3.57
                                                                                        3.05
          Ease of walking/biking                                                2.81
                                                                                        3.05
                                  1.0      1.5          2.0           2.5           3.0           3.5         4.0
                                                               Importance score
Figure 3. Average importance scores for factors related to active school commuting in residential
location choice.

School choice policy on ASC                                                                  1867
Table 5. Mean comparison of attitudinal factor across school types.
                                                School type
                                                neighborhood school   neighborhood    alternative
                                                (reference)           choice school
Mean answers to questions assessing attitude
toward active school commuting
N                                               618                   168             337
Walk/bike demonstrates commitment to               3.99                  4.25*           4.16*
   protect environment
Kids walking or biking is good way to              4.35                  4.58*           4.43*
   increase physical activity
Children may develop autodependent habit           3.58                  3.69            3.70
Children walk/bike good way to know                3.83                  3.91            3.77
   neighborhood
Driving to school contributes to environmental     3.94                  4.25            4.04
   pollution
Mean factor score                                -0.08                   0.17*           0.05
Mean answers to questions assessing attitude
car use
N                                               618                   168             337
Driving is more comfortable than walk/bike         3.84                  3.53*           3.58*
Prefer driving whenever I need to go places in     3.65                  3.49            3.39*
   this area
Owning a car contributes to a comfortable          4.01                  4.02            4.01
   lifestyle
I drive my car as much as others                   3.11                  3.21            3.12
Traffic congestion does not bother me              2.84                  2.91            2.92
Mean factor score                                  0.07                -0.06           -0.09*
*p < 0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.
bike to school” was on average considered to be of higher importance level by neighborhood
residence school parents. But the mean score for this element was below 3 for all three school
types.
     We examined whether parents’ attitudes toward travel modes were associated with school
types. Informed by previous studies investigating attitudinal factor in travel behavior (Black
et al, 2001), we developed five questions to assess ASC attitudes and five questions to assess
car-use attitudes. We asked respondents their level of agreement with a series of Likert-
scale questions, whose answers ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
We derived from these answers a factor scale to measure ASC attitude and car-use attitude,
respectively. 5 reports the mean comparison among three types of schools for the attitude
component questions and the factors.
     Our analysis shows a lack of statistically significant differences in the answers to attitude
questions across the three school types. There are only four component questions for which
statistically significant mean differences were observed. The mean differences appear to
suggest that parents of choice school students had a more positive attitude toward ASC and
a weaker car-use attitude than those of neighborhood schools. This apparently contradicts
our expectation. We think this is probably related to the fact that parents who decided to
use school choice in our sample also tended to have higher education levels, and that these
family characteristics were positively correlated with greater awareness of the health and

1868                                                               Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
environmental benefits associated with ASC [correlation coefficients not reported here, but
see Yang and Markowitz (forthcoming)].
6.4 Effects of school choice on ASC behavior
To examine the direct effects of school choice on ASC, we ran three logistic regression models.
First, we examined how school type indicators would directly predict ASC as the primary
school travel means while controlling for household background characteristics. Second, we
examined how environmental characteristics, particularly the home–school distance, would
help explain the effects of school choice policy. Finally, we looked for any still independent
effects of school type on ASC after controlling for the effects from attitudinal factors.
     The first model contains only school type indicators and household background
variables; the second model includes environmental variables; and the third model
attitudinal variables. In all models, the dependent variable was a dummy variable indicating
whether a child walked or biked to school at least three days a week. We focused on whether a
family’s primary school travel mode is ASC in our regression analyses as we believe this was
a better indicator of a family’s school travel pattern and likely to have a more distinguishable
relationship with the policy, and with environmental and attitudinal factors we wanted
to examine. We had 986 valid cases after excluding missing-value cases for any of the
variables included in the model.
     Results from the three logistic regression models are reported in table 6. Output from the
first model shows that, after controlling for household background characteristics, school
type indicators still registered statistically significant impacts on the likelihood of using ASC.
Compared with students attending their own neighborhood schools, those who attended the
neighborhood choice school were less likely to use ASC as a primary travel means by a factor
of 0.33 [B = <U+2012>1.1, p < 0.01, exp(B) = 0.33]. Attending an alternative school had a similar
effect of reducing the odds of using ASC.
     Some family characteristics register as statistically significant predictors in the model. A
child being of older age and parents with postgraduate education level increase the odds of
using ASC, while a household having more cars was associated with lowered odds of using
ASC. These findings are consistent with previous studies (eg, Ewing et al, 2004; McMillan,
2007). Compared with other income groups, the $60 000–$99 999 income group stood out
as the most likely to use ASC as a primary means, suggesting a lack of a simple relationship
between income and ASC.
     Results from the second model suggest that adding the environmental variable improves
model fit significantly as indicated by the increase in the Nagelkerke R2. While school type
variable effects remain statistically significant (p < 0.05), their magnitude becomes weaker in
the second model, which contains several environmental measures including a travel distance
variable. These findings support the hypothesis that the effect of school choice on ASC is
explained partially by environmental conditions (especially longer home–school distance).
That school type variables remain a statistically significant predictor of the use of ASC,
suggests that other factors could help explain the effects of school choice policy on ASC.
     Results from the third model indicate an even better model fit after including attitudinal
variables in the model. The Nagelkerke R2 increased from 0.313 in model 2 to 0.498 in
model 3. Both the attitudinal variables and the variables indicating school travel means
intention were statistically significant predictors of ASC. The school type variables became
either statistically insignificant (neighborhood choice school) or marginally significant
(alternative school). The size of school type variable impacts (ie, the alternative school) also
became smaller in the full model, compared with the second model. This suggests that effects
of school choice on ASC are further explained by the attitudinal variables.

1870                                                                    Y Yang, S Abbott, M Schlossberg
6.5 Summary of findings
Our study findings are summarized into three main points. First, we identified substantial
increase in home–school distance for our study case as a result of the school choice option.
This increase can be attributed to school transfers allowed by school choice options, and is
also helped by the fact that school choice affects where parents choose to live in relation to
the school they choose for their children.
     Second, in addition to distance increase, school choice also appears to affect parents’
consideration of school travel mode. We found that, compared with parents who send their
children to neighborhood schools, parents of choice school students tended to give less
consideration to travel mode in their housing choice; they also were more likely to consider
using car travel for school commuting despite having more positive attitudes toward ASC.
This suggests that, in the context of school choice without provision of school bussing, the
positive ASC attitude had a weaker impact on parents’ intention to pursue ASC behavior.
     Finally, effects of school choice policy on ASC behavior appear to be mostly explained
by its connection with travel distance and by parents’ consideration of (or attitude toward)
ASC. The regression models provide support for the two pathways of influences that school
choice can impose on the use of ASC presented in our conceptual framework.
7 Discussion
While fully embracing important social and educational goals of school choice policies,
our study illustrates that those goals may involve other unforeseen costs, including the cost
associated with school transportation. Our Oregon case may not fully represent other contexts
and the generalization of our research findings may be limited. The connection between
school choice and school travel merits future research and further case studies to provide
additional evidence.
     Several main points can be summarized from these findings. First, while they confirm
the perception that school choice is associated with increased travel demand, our study
provides some behavioral explanation for such outcome by illuminating the weight of school
transportation in parents’ decisions about their children’s school choice/selection and in their
housing choice. The discouraging findings are that school transportation was not among
the important factors, and school choice in fact aggravated that tendency. In the context of
school choice, when choosing where to live, parents assigned diminishing importance to
environmental qualities considered important for ASC and exhibited a greater willingness
to consider car use for school travel.(12)
     Indeed, what frequently surfaced in the interviews with parents and in the comments
offered in survey returns is a theme indicative of choice-school parents’ belief that “getting
the right school or education for my child” is worth driving for. In a way, school choice
motivated by parents’ desire for better ‘educational quality’ appears to reinforce the notion
that school travel is just a means to achieving an explicit goal of obtaining education. While
parents are rightly entitled to this view, this reasoning could constrain the formation of a more
complete view of school travel incorporating all environmental and health implications.
     Second, we had suspected that school choice may affect parents’ attitude toward ASC.
Our findings did not appear to suggest choice-school parents had lower or weaker attitudes.
Instead, as the choice-school families had relatively higher education achievements, parents
tended to be more aware of the environmental consequences of driving and likely possessed
(12) Note that in the 4J district, entry to a choice school is determined mainly through a lottery process
because of space limitation. A family is not guaranteed success for its school choice application. It is
interesting to discover that, for parents whose children did attend choice schools through the lottery
process, important aspects related to ASC (eg, proximity to school, school travel means) were given
inadequate consideration in their housing decision.

School choice policy on ASC                                                                  1871
more positive attitudes toward ASC. Our findings point to an awkward choice some parents
face in their school choice decision; that of choosing the right education for their children
while performing behavior inconsistent with their environmental attitude. In focus groups,
some parents expressed ‘feeling bad’ about driving to alternative schools and frustration that
the school district does not provide transportation for students attending schools by choice.
    These findings appear to support, albeit indirectly, the suggestion made by Wilson et al
(2008), that school choice could hinder the effectiveness of Safe Routes to School Programs.
Yang and Markowitz (forthcoming) suggests that parents who possess positive attitudes
toward ASC are likely to respond to environmental interventions intended to change behavior.
Yet, in the context of school choice, this very group of parents is given the opportunity to
send their children to schools based on desirability unconstrained by proximity. The likely
result is a school so distant from the residence that many environment-based interventions
(eg, sidewalk and street crossing improvements) become ineffective for these parents.
8 Policy implications
This study broadens the debate about school choice policy by connecting unintended impacts
on school travel with the intended educational benefits and addressing such connections from
an equity perspective. We do not argue for limiting school choice for the sake of reducing
travel demand. Rather, our hope is that an improved understanding of the connection between
school choice and school transportation will guide policy debates.
    Increasing ASC in the context of school choice requires more systematic and districtwide
approaches to school improvement, as the emergence of school choice is rooted in the spatial
inequality of schools, which is itself linked with many other issues such as inequality in
resource distribution and the socioeconomic fabric embedding the schools. A helpful policy
response would be a reduction in the quality gap between schools, reducing the incentive for
parents to choose alternative schools over neighborhood schools.
    While we acknowledge the societal benefits of school choice, it is important to evaluate
these benefits in a full accounting of the societal costs incurred as a whole and through
a fairness lens. Our research highlights added environmental costs associated with school
choice, and also suggests a lack of accountability mechanism for sharing those costs in
current school choice programs. Many well-to-do parents who use the school choice option
and choose to drive their children to school over long distances and more frequently, have not
been required to pay a fair price for the environmental impacts associated with this behavior.
A policy response that assures people fairly pay for the environmental costs (eg, paying
driving-distance-based fees for using school choice) appears socially just, and may reduce
the demand for school choice that is to a certain degree inflated by the ‘free’ use.
    It also should be noted that the relationship between school choice and transportation
goes another way. For some parents, especially those of lower income, school transportation
costs create an affordability barrier to school choice. For all families to have equal access to
the benefits of school choice, public policy solutions may be needed to reduce that barrier
by providing assistance to those families (eg, transportation vouchers). Other policies that
encourage ride-sharing and use of public transportation will be beneficial to all families
exercising school choice.
    While the above policy discussion focuses on inducing changes in individual- or family-
level decision-making processes, institutional-level policy solutions could significantly
affect school travel outcomes by changing the context in which travel decisions are made.
Our research shows that many families who would like to live close to a school, so that ASC
can be an option, expressed frustration with the lack of housing opportunities close to the
school of their desire. This confirms the notion that the spatial structure of schools in relation

