                            644 Albert Street East, Sault Ste. Marie, ON P6A 2K7
                            Phone: 705-945-7111 Toll Free: 1-888-393-3639

                                Select Language <U+25BC>




Transportation » Transportation, Inclement Weather & Emergency Information

Transportation, Inclement Weather & Emergency
Information


    If you have any questions regarding the school bus
  location your child uses, please call the Transportation
              Department at 705.945.5642.

CLICK HERE for Bussing and Bus Route Information.
CLICK HERE for information about Bussing Alerts
(cancellations, delays, etc).

When School Bus Transportation is Cancelled
Before School Starts

  When the Algoma & Huron Superior Transportation
  Services Consortium advises the Board of its decision
  to cancel bus transportation due to inclement weather
  or poor road conditions, an announcement of the
  cancellation will be made by the Board on the
  appropriate local radio stations and media, on our
  website www.adsb.on.ca and/or by automated
  messaging.

  Cancellation of transportation does not automatically
  mean that schools are closed. The Board will make
                        Schools open unlessTransportation
  every effort to keep schools
 Registration                               conditions are                    Staff Login   Calendar

  too severe. Before a decision is made, our Board staff
  (in consultation with our co-terminus Boards), checks
  with local Board of Works and local Police on the
  conditions of area roads. After the consultation, a
  decision is made, understanding that most parents
  need to get to work themselves and are unable to make
  arrangements for the care of their children on short
  notice if schools are closed.

  If transportation is cancelled, and schools remain open,
  parents/guardians, will need to decide whether they are
  able to transport their child(ren) to and from school that
  day. School staff will be available at the school to

  receive children. We understand that attendance will be
  reduced, but this can be an opportunity for some
  students to receive smaller group instruction or even
  some individual assistance in a subject area. As always,
  you, as the parent, make the nal decision as to
  whether or not conditions are safe for you to send your
  child to school.

  If schools must be closed due to severe conditions,
  parents and students will be advised through the local
  media and our website that schools are not open to
  students.

When Transportation and/or Classes are Cancelled
During the Day

  Once children are at school, every effort is made to
  have them remain for the day and to transport them
  home at regular dismissal time. However, in the rare,
  unlikely event that students need to be sent home
  before regular dismissal, announcements would be
  made on local radio stations and parents of elementary
  students would be contacted. If a parent can not be
  reached, the school would then call the alternate
   contact people. Secondary students would be sent
  home or to their alternate site. This is why it is so
   critical that parents maintain current contact
  information at their child’s school.


For further information regarding cancellations, please
contact your school principal.
 Registration          Schools             Transportation      Staff Login   Calendar

