School Reopening                Health and Safety           Program Information and Curriculum Supports
Special Education Supports                 Mental Health           Supported Entry
Frequently Asked Questions                  Student Transportation            COVID-19 Advisory Notices
Move to Remote Learning on January 4                      COVID Testing
                                                                                                     Translate this page:
                                                                                                  Select Language
                                                                                                Powered by       Translate
Student Transportation
   As reopening plans continue to evolve or may change, please check back regularly for student transportation
   updates.
  On This Page
   Supporting YRDSB’s Students Health and Well-being through Active School Travel
   Guidelines:
           General Principles
           Schools
           Walking or Biking to School
           Student Pick-up and Drop-off
           What are the benefits?
   Student Transportation FAQ
           1. Will transportation service be provided to students in September?
           2. Full Student Attendance
           3. Modified Student Attendance
           4. Are students required to wear masks or Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) on the bus?
           5. Will school vehicles be cleaned frequently?
           6. What happens if a student on the bus is diagnosed with COVID-19?
           7. May I opt out of bus transportation and drive my child to school?
Supporting YRDSB’s Students Health and Well-being
through Active School Travel
In effort to keep our school zones safe and reduce traffic congestion we request all families and students walk, cycle
and consider active modes as often as possible when travelling to and from school.

Below are some guidelines to consider as you journey to school.
General principles
      Stay at least two metres away from other people, including, other students, and crossing guards
      whenever possible and follow public health guidelines.
      If physical distancing measures are difficult to maintain, wear a mask.
      All students who live within walking distance are encouraged to walk or bike to and from school.
      Students in grade 4 to 8 are especially encouraged to travel on foot or by bike rather than being driven
      to school.
Schools
      Schools will share their own active school travel plan to ensure that students are dropped off and picked up
      according to these guidelines, and to set rules specific to their school situation including use of bike/scooter
      racks, Kindergarten hand-off procedures, entrance and dismissals.
Walking or Biking to School
      Stay at least two metres away from other families, school staff, crossing guards and other pedestrians.
      Greet neighbours, friends and crossing guards with a smile, wave, bow or nod.
      Remember to maintain physical distance when waiting to cross the road, if you cannot physically distance
      wear a mask.
      When walking children that must be supervised we encourage families to work together and take turns leading
      a group of children to and from school practicing physical distancing. Consider the Walking School Bus while
      adhering to health and safety measures, including physical distancing.
      Walk or cycle in single file, keeping two metres apart; step to the side to allow physical distance when passing
      someone going in the opposite direction, and near crossing guards or other pedestrians
      Let children who are capable, walk or ride the last block or two on their own or with friends practicing physical
      distancing. This way, as few adults as possible enter the busy school zone
      Families with older children are encouraged to have them walk their younger siblings to encourage as few
      adults as possible to enter the busy school zone
      Help children cross busy streets safely and let them walk or cycle from there. This is a good way to gradually
      practice pedestrian skills and grow the distance your child can travel independently
      If you cycle, dismount and walk near schools and in other areas where more pedestrians are present
      Keep in mind that bike racks and scooter racks at schools are tightly spaced and could easily tempt children to
      be closer than two metres away from each other. Have your child maintain physical distancing and wait their
      turn to store their bike or scooter.
Student Pick-up and Drop-off
      It is preferred that kiss and ride loops are reserved for kindergarten and primary grade students.
      If you choose to drive your child to school, park your car a few blocks away and walk the rest of the way to
      school to allow safe physical distancing for all and to reduce congestion at the school. Follow all street
      signage and obey parking bylaws.
      Leave home earlier to avoid congestion on your travel routes
What are the benefits?
      physical and mental health and overall wellbeing including stronger immune systems,
      social development and improved academic performance
      reduced vehicle congestion on our school sites and in our neighbourhoods, and
      reduced air pollution and CO2 emissions
Many of our schools have active school travel plans in place and previously worked to encourage active school travel
through a number of initiatives including Walking Wednesdays, Bike to School week etc. If you need some ideas to
help boost active school travel modes at your school please visit the student transportation active school travel
programs website.

Frequently Asked Questions
1. Will transportation service be provided to students in September?
Yes. At this me, Student Transporta on Services of York Region (STSYR) is collabora ng with the YCDSB and YRDSB to
plan transporta on services for eligible students for two possible school a endance scenarios:
2. Full Student Attendance
Under this scenario, all students will a end school each day and students eligible for transporta on will be provided
service using standard opera ng procedures.
3. Modified Student Attendance
Under this scenario, students will a end school on an adap ve schedule. Students eligible for transporta on will be
provided service using enhanced opera ng procedures.
Review transporta on policies for the YCDSB and YRDSB.
4. Are students required to wear masks or Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) on the
bus?
The use of face coverings for students in Grades 4 -12 will be required on school vehicles. Students in JK - Grades 3 will be
encouraged but not required to wear face coverings on student transporta on.
5. Will school vehicles be cleaned frequently?
Consistent with public health recommenda ons, bus and taxi operators will be sani zing school vehicles throughout the
day using disinfectants authorized by Health Canada. In addi on, bus and taxi operators will be performing regular deep
cleaning of the vehicles during o<U+FB00>-service hours.
6. What happens if a student on the bus is diagnosed with COVID-19?
If a student is diagnosed with COVID-19, STSYR, YCDSB and YRDSB will follow established procedures along with the
guidance and recommenda ons of public health.
7. May I opt out of bus transportation and drive my child to school?
Yes. If your child is eligible for transporta on service you may opt out of service for this school year by comple ng an
online form which will be sent directly to you in early August.

© York Region District School Board
