                                                       Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
                                                        Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                                              Transportation Research Part F
                                           journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trf
Active school travel, attitudes and psychological well-being of
children
Juliane Stark a,<U+21D1>, Michael Meschik a, Patrick A. Singleton b, Bettina Schützhofer c
a
  University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Department of Landscape, Spatial and Infrastructure Sciences, Institute for Transport Studies, Peter Jordan St.
82, 1190 Vienna, Austria
b
  Utah State University, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 4110 Old Main Hill, Logan, Utah 84322-4110, United States
c
  sicher unterwegs – Verkehrspsychologische Untersuchungen GmbH, Vienna, Austria
a r t i c l e          i n f o                          a b s t r a c t
Article history:                                        The decline in physical activity levels among children emphasizes a need for research on
Received 7 February 2018                                experiences related to children’s active travel. The present study investigates the relation-
Received in revised form 12 April 2018                  ship between mode use on school trips and psychological well-being (PWB) of children.
Accepted 12 May 2018
                                                        Data were collected from 152 primary school children in Lower Austria. The paper-and-
Available online 2 June 2018
                                                        pencil survey investigated transport-related attitudes, travel behavior, and children’s emo-
                                                        tional well-being depending on the travel mode used on their trip to school. Parents’ per-
Keywords:
                                                        ceptions of their child’s travel mode on well-being were also collected in 31 in-depth
Active school travel
Mode use
                                                        interviews. Findings suggest that active school travel is positively associated with chil-
Children                                                dren’s PWB, and that travel-related attitudes towards modes are significantly related to
Well-being                                              well-being. However, it is difficult to determine the causal direction between the two vari-
Attitudes                                               ables as causal feedback loops can be assumed. Clear results can be obtained for the par-
School trips                                            ental survey: Parents reported strong positive associations between active travel modes
                                                        and the well-being of their children. More research with bigger sample sizes and higher
                                                        quality measures should be conducted, including about non-school trips and with longitu-
                                                        dinal datasets, to further evaluate the interrelations between children’s mode use, atti-
                                                        tudes, and well-being and to determine the most successful strategies for increasing
                                                        active mobility among children.
                                                                                                                  Ó 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
     Changes in children’s travel patterns and associated negative impacts to health and well-being have been a recent subject
of research. Current developments show that children’s levels of physical activity have decreased to alarming rates. Accord-
ing to the actual report on the situation of young people between 15 and 30 years old in Austria, only 57% fulfil the World
Health Organization (WHO) recommendations on health-preserving physical activity (HEPA) (BMFJ, 2016). If only children
and teenagers (aged 11–17) are considered, just 17% fulfil the WHO recommendations of one hour of physical activity per
day (Ramelow, Teutsch, Hofmann, & Felder-Puig, 2015). In parallel, independent mobility of children has been declining with
significant consequences for the physical, social and mental development of children (e.g. Frauendienst & Redecker, 2011;
Shaw et al., 2013, 2015). Studies on health-related impacts of children’s mobility mainly focus on physical well-being and
  <U+21D1> Corresponding author.
     E-mail address: juliane.stark@boku.ac.at (J. Stark).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.05.007
1369-8478/Ó 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

454                                             J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
health determinants such as cardiovascular fitness, cholesterol levels, and blood pressure (e.g. Lubans, Boreham, Kelly, &
Foster, 2011; Panter, Jones, & van Sluijs, 2008; Schoeppe, Duncan, Badland, Oliver, & Curtis, 2013). Benefits of active travel
modes for psychological and social well-being are assumed, but empirical studies measuring these effects for children are
still scarce.
    Understanding the links between children’s active travel behavior and psychological well-being may provide important
suggestions for policy-makers on how quality of life in cities can be improved. If a positive interrelation of children’s well-
being and active travel can be demonstrated, this may also help to sharpen the focus of travel awareness campaigns promot-
ing walking and cycling among young people. In particular, if parents are aware that active travel contributes to the child’s
(and their own) well-being, it could serve as an efficient incentive for behavior change. Moreover, multiplier effects are to be
expected as it is assumed that positive feedback loops exist whereby positive emotions reinforce actions, making people
more likely to repeat those healthy behaviors (Ramanathan, O’Brien, Faulkner, & Stone, 2014). In addition to their policy rel-
evance, measurements of well-being can possibly enhance behavioral models (Singleton, 2017).
    This paper describes the results of a study of 152 children and 31 parents in Lower Austria, including a descriptive and
exploratory analysis of relationships between children’s mode use, modal attitudes, and well-being. The analysis—based on
in-class surveys of children and interviews with parents—also served as a methodological experiment, which attempted to
assess travel-related well-being of children based on self-reports. In this study, children reported their emotions after trav-
eling to school. Thus, this paper focuses on the affective domain of subjective/psychological well-being pertaining a short
time frame.
    The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 gives a brief overview of different concepts of understanding and measuring
well-being, as well as previous research in the field of children’s well-being and mode use. Section 3 describes the survey
approach and questionnaires. Section 4 presents the results of the descriptive–explorative data analysis. The paper closes
with a brief discussion and conclusions on the study methodology and results (Section 5).
2. Literature and research questions
2.1. Definitions and measurement of well-being
    The broad concept of well-being is closely related to, encompasses, or is encompassed by the concepts of happiness, sat-
isfaction, and (health-related) quality of life (QoL).1 According to several definitions (Patrick & Erickson, 1988; Schumacher,
Klaiberg, & Brähler, 2003), health-related QoL is a broad, multi-dimensional construct considering physical limitations, mental
(and emotional, spiritual, etc.) states, functional abilities in everyday areas of life, and social interactions. Whereas this QoL con-
cept has been mainly applied in the social sciences and medicine, the focus of this study is on the slightly narrower concept of
psychological well-being.
    Psychological well-being (PWB) is one of five domains of children’s well-being identified in the literature (Pollard & Lee,
2003; Waygood, Friman, Olsson, & Taniguchi, 2017); the others are physical, economic, cognitive (learning-related), and
social. Also known as subjective well-being, PWB deals with emotions, stress, affect, happiness, fulfillment, and life satisfac-
tion. Although well-being can be classified in different ways (Nordbakke & Schwanen, 2014), this subjective version of well-
being tends to be distinguished into hedonic and eudaimonic aspects. Following Becker (1994) and Diener (1984, 2000), hedo-
nic well-being has two dimensions: (1) the affective component, characterized by a positive/negative emotional state or
mood (more short-term), and (2) the cognitive–evaluative component, including a more self-aware assessment of general life
satisfaction (more long-term). In contrast, eudaimonic well-being represents more high-level aspects such as personal
growth, finding purpose or meaning, and self-actualization or achieving one’s full potential (De Vos, Schwanen, Van
Acker, & Witlox, 2013). Based on these classifications, this study looks at the affective component of hedonic subjective
or psychological well-being.
    Studies of the connections between transportation, travel, and well-being have become more common in recent years
(e.g., De Vos et al., 2013; Delbosc, 2012; Nordbakke & Schwanen, 2014; Reardon & Abdallah, 2013). Many of these studies
look at PWB associated with a particular mode or during or immediately after an individual trip; but, in line with multifold
measures of well-being and quality of life,2 different scales and questionnaires exist for measuring this travel-related PWB
(Singleton & Mokhtarian, in preparation). One of the most common measures is the Satisfaction with Travel Scale (STS)
(Ettema et al., 2011), a nine-item scale of hedonic well-being that reproduces the affective and cognitive–evaluative dimen-
sions.3 Other more ad-hoc approaches have investigated overall satisfaction with or an affinity for travel in general, specific
modes, and recent trips. The latter ‘‘travel liking” questions likely measure travel affect, while the former ‘‘travel satisfaction”
  1
    Many studies exist in the field of health-related QoL of children and adolescents (e.g. Bullinger, 2009; Bullinger & Ravens-Sieberer, 1995; Drotar, 1998;
Ravens-Sieberer, 2000).
  2
    Examples include: WHOQOL (WHOQOL-Group, 1994), ILK Rating questionnaire (Mattejat et al., 1998); EuroQOL (Kind, 1996); EORTC-questionnaire
(Aaronson, Cull, Kaasa, & Sprangers, 1996), Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965), Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) (Watson, Clark, &
Tellegen, 1988), Scale of Positive and Negative Experience (SPANE) (Diener et al., 2010), Swedish Core Affect Scale (SCAS) (Västfjäll, Friman, Gärling, & Kleiner,
2002), and others.
  3
    Westman, Olsson, Gärling, and Friman (2017) used an adapted version of the STS-scale for a survey with children.

                                        J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465                   455
questions appear to be more about cognitive than affective aspects of hedonic PWB (De Vos et al., 2013; Singleton & Clifton,
2017).
    A challenge for the purposes of this study is that these measures of travel-related PWB have mostly been used to inves-
tigate the well-being of adults, and they may not be well-suited to the abilities and developmental conditions of children.
Some children (depending on experiences and age) have short attention spans, a low capability in reading and an inability
to fully understand certain complex questions (Henerson, Morris, & Fitz, 1987). Thus, visual scales are often used for chil-
dren’s self-assessment of well-being. Emoticons, in particular, can help children to understand what is expected of them
while also making the task more enjoyable. For example, Andrews and Withey (1976) developed a scale with seven faces
that express different moods and emotions; this instrument was suitable for self-reports of the general well-being of chil-
dren in a recent study (Wydra, 2014). The present study also adopted emoticons to measure the current state of children’s
emotional PWB.
    Despite the guiding principle behind PWB, that only a person her/himself can serve as an expert for her/his own well-
being (Schwenkmezger, 1994), the particularities of children suggest that multiple methods may be appropriate for explor-
ing a child’s subjective perceptions. Third-party assessments of children’s well-being—for example, assessments by parents
and experts (e.g. medical doctors) (Mattejat et al., 1998)—can be used in a complementary way to supplement children’s own
self-assessments, thus helping to paint a fuller picture of PWB. This study utilizes both children’s and parent’s subjective
assessments of children’s well-being.
2.2. Children’s psychological well-being and mode use
    As mentioned above, there are only few studies examining relationships between children’s well-being and travel. This is
confirmed in reviews by Waygood, Friman, Olsson, and Taniguichi (2015), Waygood et al. (2017), who report that—apart
from the relationship between transportation and the physical domain of child well-being—most well-being domains are
poorly researched; although, more studies were found for psychological and social well-being than for economic well-
being. In this section, our review focuses on the second of three ‘‘means of impact” of transport on children’s well-being iden-
tified by Waygood et al. (2017): those intrinsic impacts during travel or as a direct result of traveling. Other authors
(Singleton & Mokhtarian, in preparation) discuss these impacts as being related to the experiences of traveling by certain
modes, routes, etc.
    In their review, Waygood et al. (2017) present mainly positive relations with overall well-being for walking and cycling
(respectively) and for active transport in general, and negative associations with car travel. (The results for public transport
were more ambivalent.) When taking into account only the intrinsic influences on PWB, active modes appear to influence
short-term well-being in the form of positive experiences, enjoyment, self-esteem and reduced stress (Waygood et al.,
2017). For example, a large sample study in Canada found that parents and children who used active travel modes to school
reported more positive emotions compared to passive mode travelers (Ramanathan, O’Brien, Faulkner, & Stone, 2014). In
Austria, an evaluation of the ‘‘Schoolwalker” initiative demonstrated that parents and teachers reported an enhanced posi-
tive mood as well as improved concentration ability of children due to active mobility (Thaller, Schnabel, & Gollner, 2014);
positive emotions were significantly related to well-being on school trips. A recent case study in Hong Kong revealed that
primary school children engaging in active transport modes rated their journeys as happier than those using motorized
transport (Leung & Loo, 2017). Westman et al. (2017) investigated whether travel mode (amongst other factors) affects chil-
dren’s satisfaction with their school journeys and their current mood immediately after arriving at school in the morning and
later on in the afternoon. They found that travel mode was associated with children’s satisfaction with their school travel;
specifically, mean ratings of travel satisfaction were higher for active travel modes and school bus than for car, which might
be explained by a greater opportunity for physical activity or social interactions. Assessments of current mood (ratings of
valence and activation) were also higher for active travel mode users than for those traveling by car, although the differences
were not statistically significant.
    Despite these relatively consistent findings, in their integrated review, Waygood et al. (2017) concluded that ‘‘more effort
is required to replicate findings” (p. 37) in the psychological domain, likely because there remain so few transport studies
focusing on children’s well-being.
    The results of the studies concerning mode use and children’s PWB are in line with findings concerning adults. Research
using various measures of PWB—including the STS, as well as travel liking and satisfaction—consistently find that adults rate
walking and bicycling more positively than they rate travelling by car. For example, Martin, Goryakin, and Suhrcke (2014)
revealed that travelling by active modes to work positively influenced well-being, as operationalized by the WHO-5 Well-
Being Index (Winther Topp, Ostergaard, & Sondergaard, 2015). Kemen (2016) also used the WHO-5 Well-Being questionnaire
and found that cyclists had a 4–5 points higher well-being score than other traffic mode user groups. Singleton (2018) found
that walk and bicycle commuters rated their experiences much higher than other commuters on both positive affect and
overall hedonic well-being.
2.3. Attitudes, travel behavior, and psychological well-being
    Although the literature review thus far has focused on travel behavior and its influences on PWB, another psychosocial
concept is important to briefly discuss: attitudes. The theory of planned behavior (TPB) (Ajzen, 1991) suggests that attitudes

456                                    J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
towards a behavior—along with other social-psychological factors like subjective norms and perceived behavioral control—
influence that behavior. In our case, this would suggest that attitudes towards walking and bicycling may influence the
choice to walk or cycle to school. However, the empirical evidence is more complex than this suggests. For example, St-
Louis, Manaugh, van Lierop, and El-Geneidy (2014) revealed that the amount of satisfaction with the chosen travelling mode
is highly influenced by attitudes towards the selected means of travel. However, Ory and Mokhtarian (2009) found little
effect of attitudes on travel behavior; instead, their structural equation models found stronger evidence that affect (as mea-
sured by travel liking) influences modal perceptions. This supports statements by Parkanay et al. (2004), who suggest that a
better representation of these linkages would be a circular process (or causal feedback loop) by which traveling generates
(positive and negative) emotions related to mode/trip, which in turn affects perceptions and attitudes towards that mode
or trip, thus eventually influencing future travel behavior choices. Similar findings were obtained by recent studies on bidi-
rectional relationships from Kroesen, Handy, and Chorus (2017) and De Vos and Witlox (2017).
2.4. Present study & hypotheses
    This article contributes to the literature by presenting the results of an analysis of survey data examining associations
between mode use on school trips, travel-related attitudes and affective (emotional) indicators of psychological well-
being among Austrian children in the province of Lower Austria. Perceptions of both children and parents were examined
to analyze the interrelation of mode use and children’s PWB and mode-specific attitudes. Based on the results of the liter-
ature review, our fundamental hypothesis was that active travel positively affects children’s well-being, thus generating
more positive attitudes towards active modes. Therefore, we expected that children’s PWB, active travel mode use, and
active mode attitudes would all be positively associated. Although we controlled for gender in our analyses, due to a lack
of data we ignored household characteristics and other psychosocial attributes (e.g., the availability of vehicles in the house-
hold, parental behavior etc.), which are also important factors for mode choice.
3. Methods
3.1. Study design and participants
    We conducted a two-stage survey at five primary schools in Lower Austria. These schools show comparable environments
and are situated in villages with 1350–2550 inhabitants, with the exception of one school in a town of 16,150 inhabitants. All
municipalities are located in rural areas in the west of Vienna, in relatively flat terrain and with typical ample gardens. Public
transit for school children is provided. In the schools’ catchment areas, the conditions for non-motorized modes are similar,
as are the conditions for car use. The first survey-stage contained a paper-and-pencil survey investigating the children’s pref-
erences, their actual well-being and general mobility behavior. In the second stage, parents were invited to take part in an
interview because children’s mode choices are often mediated by their parents.
    The surveys were conducted between May and October 2016 (except for July and August due to school holidays). In the
analyses, we controlled for the different dates of the surveys to preclude the season (spring versus fall) or the timing within a
school from influencing the results. It is important to note that the surveys of children were conducted on the day of a bicycle
training for which the schools had registered. In the course of this, informed consent from parents on their child’s and their
own willingness to take part in interviews was requested at parents’ evenings.
    In total, 152 children (51% female) took part in the mobility and attitude survey. Children in the sample stem from the 3rd
and 4th school grade (mean age 9.6). The paper-and-pencil survey was carried out in the first school lesson in the morning.
Researchers and teachers supervised the children in completing in the questionnaire. Although we used a child-oriented
questionnaire, the children were quite used to fill-in worksheets and were looking forward to filling in the questionnaire;
the supervisors went through the questionnaire point for point conjointly. Considerable importance was attached to instruc-
tions on the scales used in the questionnaire. A similar approach was used by Waygood and Kitamura (2009) who collected
self-completion travel diaries from grade-five students in Japan.
    In the second stage, interviews with parents were conducted (N = 31). The interviews with parents involved both face-to-
face and telephone interviews. Except for one father, all of the participants were mothers (mean age 39.8). A tabular over-
view of key figures of the data sources is given in Table 1.
3.2. Questionnaires
3.2.1. Children’s questionnaire
    The children’s survey was partly designed based on self-completion questionnaires, which have been proven successful in
previous interviews with children and youth (Stark, Bartana, & Fritz, 2015). It also contained examples on how to mark the
answers correctly. The questionnaire utilized pictograms and emoticons plus very simple wording to ask questions about
mode use on the reported day, individual preferences for school and leisure trips and the frequency of travel mode use.
    First, children stated the transport mode used for their trip to school in the morning on the reporting date by encircling a
pictogram plus mode name. Due to the bicycle training on the day of the survey, some children unusually used the bicycle or

                                               J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465                                            457
Table 1
Key figures of the data sources.
    Period of data                                                                  May–October 2016
    collection
    Location                                                                           Lower Austria
    Target group          Primary school children                                    Parents of primary school children
    N (schools)           152 (5)                                                    31 (5)
    Mean age              9.6                                                        39.8
    Survey design         PAPIa                                                      Telephone, face-to-face
    Content with regard to . . . (excerpt)
    . . .Mobility         Mode use to school on reporting day, frequency of          Frequency of mode use (parent + child)
         behavior         mode use (ST)
    . . .PWB              Subjective PWB dependent on mode use (ST)                  Well-being dependent on mode use (child)
    . . .Attitudes        Mode-specific attitudes, preferences (ST/LT)               mode-specific attitudes, attitudes regarding physical activity and active
                                                                                     mobility
    . . .Other            Self-assessment of cycling skills, satisfaction with       Sociodemographics, activity level (child), health aspects, assessment of
                          activity level                                             child’s cycling skills
Abbreviations: PAPI – paper and pencil interview, PWB – psychological well-being, ST – school trip, LT- leisure trip.
  a
      Self-administered questionnaire with supervision.
were car passengers because parents brought bicycle and child by car. To consider this bias, children also reported the fre-
quency of use on ‘‘normal” school trips [(nearly) always, frequently, sometimes, (nearly) never] for each given travel mode [car
passenger, bus/train, scooter, bicycle, walking]. Further, their individual preferences of travel modes on school and leisure trips
were surveyed, again, using pictograms to visualize travel modes. The children’s attitudes with regard to the five travel
modes were assessed using a 5-point scale with smileys and a keyword [really cool, good, average, bad, really uncool].
      Subjective psychological well-being was addressed with two items. The first question was directly related to the mode
use on children’s school trips: ‘‘How do you feel in the first school lesson, when you have walked to school [went by bicycle/scoo-
ter/by bus or train/were taken by car to school]?” Children had to tick boxes using a 5-point scale with smileys (Fig. 1); no key
words were used to describe the mood icons. If children never use one of the given modes on their trip to school, they were
directed to cross out the respective row. This question was repeated by asking for the children’s well-being during the last
school lesson, following the assumption that children feel better during the day if they performed some physical activity in
the morning.
      Of course, these questions about PWB are very general and abstract; however, we assumed that children were able to give
a valid answer as school trips are part of the children’s daily routines. Ramanathan, O’Brien, Faulkner, and Stone (2014) had
good experiences with similar concise questions about children’s ‘‘usual feelings” on their ways to school. We also assumed
that the display of faces expressing different emotions would elicit responses that were more about the affective than the
cognitive aspects of PWB.
      Other questions, not relevant in this paper, referred to cycling skills and physical activity: Smileys and a five-point scale
were used for a self-assessment on cycling skills with two items: (i) ‘‘How good are you in cycling?” and (ii) ‘‘How comfort-
able/safe do you feel when you are cycling?” We asked if the children like to be physically active [yes/no] and if they would
like to get more exercise [yes/no].
      We do not have the addresses of children’s homes or the distances of their ways to schools.
3.2.2. Parent’s questionnaire
      The parent’s survey included questions about the household, the parent and the child. Topics covered in the in-depth
interview included: mobility behavior (parent, child), availability of travel modes (parent, child), cycling skills (child), atti-
tudes with regard to independent mobility and cycling (parent), physical activity levels (child), as well as physical and men-
tal condition (child). As the overall topic was cycling skills, the sample might have been biased because parents with a high
affinity for active lifestyles may have been more likely to volunteer to take part in the interviews. We were also unable to
prevent social desirability bias from affecting answers by the parents.
      In the following, only relevant questions for the analysis are briefly described. The impact of a child’s everyday mobility
on her/his well-being was analyzed using open-ended and closed questions. First, parents were asked open-ended questions
about how everyday mobility affects a child’s behavior and well-being on a day when the child mainly uses active travel
modes versus usually traveling as a passenger in a car. Then, parents evaluated a set of well-being items on a 4-point Likert
scale [fully agree - not agree] regarding a day when the child mainly uses bicycle/scooter (or bus/train, walks a lot, travels as
car-passenger a lot). The following 14 items were selected from the ILK Rating questionnaire (Inventory for assessment of
quality of life in children and adolescents, after Mattejat et al., 1998) and the ‘‘Questionnaire for general well-being,
1998” (Wydra, 2014): healthy, strong/powerful, physically challenged, self-confident, feels well in his/her body, fit/sportive, happy,
balanced, unhappy, annoyed/angry, stressed/nervous, uncertain/anxious, tired, has physical complaints. Thus, these questions
cover not just psychological but also physical well-being. In the questionnaire, the items were arranged to provide a mix
between positive and negative associations.

458                                            J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
                                                  Fig. 1. Mood icons for children’s self-report on well-being.
4. Results
    These data were analyzed using bivariate measures of association to examine relationships between children’s well-being
(self-reported), mode use, and modal attitudes. Group comparisons between boys and girls were conducted. A descriptive
analysis was conducted for the parental assessments on the interrelation of well-being of their children and mode use.
4.1. Mode use
    The modal split in the sample based on the children’s survey is given in Table 2. The high share of cycling on the reported
day was likely due to the fact that some children unusually traveled by bicycle to take part in the cycling training. The share
of car use is also a little higher, presumably, because some parents drove the bicycle (and child) to school. Therefore, the
modal split on a ‘‘normal day” is also provided. The share of children using active modes (walking, bicycle, and scooter)
was very high compared to public transport (PT) use, mainly because of the relatively lower PT-supply in Lower Austria.
As the table shows, children preferred to use their bicycle or scooter as well as walking on their school trips. The high pref-
erence for active modes is a well-known pattern of children in this age group (e.g. Aschauer & Stark, 2016; Limbourg, Flade, &
Schönharting, 2000; O’Brien, 2008; Zwerts, Allaert, Janssens, Wets, & Witlox, 2010). No significant differences in terms of
gender were observed. We found also no significant differences in terms of school location and time of the survey (spring
versus fall), except for the modal split on the reported date. At two schools (surveyed in May), bicycle use was much lower
because the children were asked to take it to school the day before.
4.2. Mode use and well-being
    Children’s self-reports showed generally quite high levels of PWB which are expressed in values closer to five (Table 3).
Well-being decreased slightly between first and last school lesson; however, the differences were not statistically significant.
In addition, no effect of gender could be found.
    But, well-being during the first lesson differed significantly between travel modes (Friedman-test: Chi-Quadrat(4) =
 67.15, p = .000, N = 98). The post hoc Dunn-Bonferroni test showed significant differences to the advantage of active modes
(mainly bicycle): Well-being after bicycle-use was rated higher than car (z = 3.817, padjusted = .001), public transport
(z = 6.844, padjusted = .000) and walking (z = 2.959, padjusted = .031); PWB after scooter-use was rated higher than public
transport (z = 4.201, padjusted = .000). These effect sizes according to Cohen (1992) were medium to high. An active mode
(walking, bicycle, scooter) versus passive mode (car as a passenger, public transport) comparison—following Ramanathan,
O’Brien, Faulkner, and Stone (2014)4—revealed that perceptions of well-being were significantly higher for active modes
(Median = 4.5) than for passive modes (Median = 4.0; asymptotic Wilcoxon-test: z = 5.849, p = .000, N = 151). The effect size
is r = 0.48 and corresponds to a large effect size.
4.3. Travel-related attitudes
    Children had very positive attitudes towards active travel modes, especially regarding the use of bicycle (Table 4). Again,
it should be noted that children may have been looking forward to the cycle training on the given day. In addition, this high
rating might be explained by the fact that some children used their bicycle in the morning by way of exception, leading to
euphoric responses. To consider this possibility, we conducted a sub-analysis by excluding children who used the bicycle on
the reporting day but stated that they (nearly) never normally use the bicycle on their trip to school; this refers to 14% of the
sample. Against expectations, children who cycled on the reporting day but who rarely do so on a normal day actually
assessed the bicycle worse (Mann-Whitney-U-Test: U = 1080.500, p = .039; effect size r = 0.17); thus, we reject this possible
explanation.
    Significant differences in terms of gender were only found for bicycle use: Males assessed cycling to be ‘‘cooler”
(Mann-Whitney-U-Test: U = 2412.000, p = .022; effect size r = 0.19). To control for the possibility of the date of the survey
having an impact on the children’s perceptions, we analyzed attitudes with regard to two groups (spring versus fall). No
significant differences could be observed, except that the car mode was assessed more positively at schools which took part
in the survey at the end of the school year than in September or October (Mann-Whitney-U-Test: U = 1761.500, p = .000;
  4
    It should be noted that the use of public transport is often combined with walking trip stages.

                                                J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465                                           459
                                       Table 2
                                       Travel mode used by children on the way to school, N = 152.
                                          Travel mode                      Reported date     Normal day       Preference
                                          Car use as a passenger           25.0%             23.5%            7.2%
                                          Public transport                 17.1%             19.1%            8.6%
                                          Walking                          19.7%             26.1%            13.2%
                                          Bicycle                          32.9%             15.1%            59.9%
                                          Scooter                          5.3%              16.2%            11.2%
Table 3
Means of indicators of subjective well-being in the first/last lesson, per travel mode, five-point scale (5 = high well-being, 1 = low well-being).
                     Car passenger (N = 150)         Public transport (N = 131)         Walking (N = 145–146)         Bicycle (N = 143)      Scooter (N = 124)
    First lesson     3.91                            3.50                               4.23                          4.59                   4.16
    Last lesson      3.62                            3.31                               4.12                          4.44                   4.07
Table 4
Mean values of attitudes, five-point scale (5 = positive, 1 = negative), N = 152.
                                  Car passenger                     Public transport              Walking                Bicyclea                      Scooter
    All (N = 152)                 3.39                              2.97                          3.84                   4.63 (4.38/4.67)              3.97
    Female (N = 78)               3.32                              3.06                          3.87                   4.49                          3.94
    Male (N = 74)                 3.47                              2.86                          3.80                   4.78                          4.00
  a
     Value in brackets: children who used the bicycle only exceptionally on the reporting date (N = 21)/others (N = 131).
effect size r = 0.32). A detailed look at the school sites did not reveal any explanation. As no corresponding effect could be
found for active travel modes, this issue remains unexplained.
4.4. Interrelation: attitudes, mode use and well-being
     A Spearman’s correlation analysis identified and tested the strengths of relationships between PWB and both attitudes as
well as mobility behavior, using the children’s self-reported general frequency of mode use to school. Based on their defini-
tions in the data set, higher scores of the input variables stand for (i) a higher PWB-level in the morning after mode use, (ii) a
more positive attitude towards a travel mode, and (iii) a higher frequency of mode use on trips to school.
     Table 5 shows the correlation coefficients of the relations between (i) PWB and frequency of mode use and (ii) PWB and
mode-specific attitude. There are medium positive bivariate correlations between well-being and frequency of mode use,
which are statistically significant for car, public transport, walking and scooter modes (rs = 0.133–0.386). The results indicate
that higher levels of well-being after using a certain travel mode are related to a higher frequency of mode use on the way to
school. Furthermore, children reporting higher levels of PWB after using a certain travel mode had a more positive attitude
towards this travel mode (rs = 0.222–0.482). This result is statistically significant for all travel modes.
     Despite these results, we cannot necessarily conclude that children choose travel modes on the basis of travel-related
PWB, nor that children’s attitudes towards travel modes are the direct result of their well-being after using them. Due to
the ‘‘reciprocal nature of psychological factors and behavior” (Bamberg & Schmidt, 1998), the fundamental cause-effects
relationships are unclear. Repeated exposure can be sufficient to enhance the attitude towards a stimulus (mere exposure);
in other words, well-being may be rated higher if the travel mode is used more often. The same issue applies for attitude, as
attitude and behavior are normally highly correlated. In our case, attitude and behavior correlate significantly on medium to
high level for public transport (rs = 0.516, p = .000), walking (rs = 0.275, p = .001) and scooter (rs = 0.426, p = .000). For car and
bicycle, no significant bivariate correlations can be observed, presumably because children have less freedom to choose,
because they rely on their parents’ mobility decisions and attitudes (Stark, Frühwirth, & Aschauer, 2018). This is not only
the case for car use, but also for cycling, as children in Austria need a supervisor up to the age of 12 (children who have suc-
cessfully passed the cycling proficiency test can travel without an adult from the age of 10).
4.5. Parent survey
     As outlined above, parents were asked to assess the well-being of their child in relation to their child’s mobility behavior.
In response to the open-ended questions, parents gave mostly positive associations when children use primarily active travel
modes on a given day: The most frequent answers were that children are ‘‘balanced, happy, and pleased” (Table 6). Parents
also reported that children have a better good night sleep due to higher activity levels. In contrast, when children mainly
travel as car-passenger, children are ‘‘bad-tempered, restless, and annoyed”. However, occasionally, parents reported that
their children are satisfied because of comfort when traveling by car.

460                                               J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
                                    Table 5
                                    Correlation coefficients (Spearman’s rho) of psychological well-being (PWB), by travel
                                    mode, N = 152.
                                         Travel mode            PWB  Frequency of use          PWB  Mode-specific attitude
                                         Car passenger          0.182*                          0.320**
                                         Public transport       0.386**                         0.377**
                                         Walking                0.292**                         0.439**
                                         Bicycle                0.133                           0.222**
                                         Scooter                0.300**                         0.482**
                                       *
                                          Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
                                      **
                                          Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
Table 6
Open answers of parents with regard to the well-being of their children dependent on the travel mode used on a given day (N = 31).
                          When the child uses bicycle, scooter, or walks a lot                               When the child is traveling as car-passenger a lot
  Frequent answers        Pleased, balanced, quiet, happy, physically fit, mentally fit, ‘‘positively        Restless, annoyed, irritable, bored, dissatisfied,
                          tired‘‘, allows for a better night’s sleep, no behavioral problems                 unbalanced, bad-tempered, fidgety, less receptive
  Occasional answers      More receptive, exhausted, partly physical complaints                              Satisfied because of comfort, quiet, urge to move,
                                                                                                             slightly aggressive, nausea
    The positive impacts of active travel on the children’s well-being are also reflected in the quantitative evaluation of well-
being indicators (Fig. 2). Parents’ agreement rates on positive aspects of well-being were higher for walking and cycling com-
pared to public transport and car use. Modal differences on the negative aspects were not as substantial, although there was
a clear tendency that active travel modes do not lead to negative impacts on the child’s psychological and physical well-
being. The exception was tiredness; however, following the parents’ open answers, tiredness can also be seen positively.
    As outlined above, socially desirable answers cannot be excluded, and there is also a risk that parents who participated in
the in-depth interviews had an affinity for active travel modes that affected their responses. To control for a possible bias, we
investigated the general travel patterns of our sample. In doing so, we assigned a score from 0 [(nearly) never] to 4 [(nearly)
daily] for the given frequency of mode use on the 5-part scale and calculated means for the sample. Fig. 3 shows the parents’
responses with regard to their own and their child’s travel behavior. We found that a high share of parents uses a bicycle
             Fig. 2. Parents’ assessments of well-being of their children, dependent on main transport mode used on a given day (N = 31).

                                              J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465                                   461
      Fig. 3. Parents’ responses on general travel patterns (frequency of mode use) for themselves and their child (motorcycle excluded) (N = 31).
(nearly) every day or 2–3 times a week (64%) which is also reflected in the children’s frequency of bicycle use. However, as
usual for rural areas in Lower Austria, car use is very popular in our sample: 97% of the parents use the car (nearly) daily or 2–
3 times a week. These corresponding shares can be attributed to the fact that, at this age, most of the children’s trips are
accompanied and most decisions on mode choice are made by the parents (Stark et al., 2018).
    In this context, parents presumably may want to justify their travel related decisions and thus might assess—for exam-
ple—car use less negatively when they (and their child) travel by car very often. Therefore, we investigated the correlations
between (parents’ and children’s) frequencies of general mode use and parents’ assessments of children’s well-being. Posi-
tive (or negative) correlations mean that higher frequencies of mode usage are associated with more positive (or more neg-
ative) assessments of well-being; thus, significant correlations might imply the presence of justification bias. The results
show only a few significant relations, mostly for public transport (Table A1, Appendix). Parents who use active modes more
frequently (or whose children use active modes more frequently) do not seem to rate their children’s well-being more pos-
itively for active modes than do other parents. Thus, we conclude that substantial parental justification bias does not appear
to have affected our data.
5. Discussion
    This study sheds light on a relatively unexplored field of research concerning the relationships between psychological
well-being (PWB), travel behavior, and travel-related attitudes of children. We analyzed person-based PWB-travel behavior
relationships (and PWB-attitude relationships) using a data set from primary school children and their parents in rural areas
of Lower Austria. Children’s self-reported PWB was measured using a faces scale asking for their subjective feeling (emotion
or affect) in the first (and last) school lesson.
    Our fundamental hypothesis was that active travel has a positive effect on children’s psychological well-being. The main
finding suggests that mode use on the way to school is associated with children’s PWB, whereby the use of active travel
modes (walking, cycling, and scooter) is advantageous. Another key finding is that travel-related attitudes and well-being
are connected in such a way that positive attitudes towards individual travel modes are significantly associated with higher
ratings of PWB when the mode is used. These findings are consistent with our hypothesis and with previous literature on
children’s well-being.
    However, given the limitations of our cross-sectional dataset, we are unable to conclude about the direction of causality
in these relationships among PWB and both attitudes and mode use. Well-being (and attitude) may be rated higher if the
travel mode is used more often, either because the child enjoys it (a causal feedback loop: attitude ? mode use ? PWB
? attitude) or because of a lack of feasible alternatives. The former case would support our hypothesis, just over a longer
time frame. In contrast, Festinger’s (1957) dissonance theory suggests that attitudes change to fit the behavior, thus reducing
discomfort and increasing psychological well-being. In this latter case, the associations we observed between attitude, mode
use, and PWB may be spurious from a causal perspective. Longitudinal data collection focused on travel mode-related atti-
tude formation in children could help to illuminate these issues. A further challenge to this research is that a clear empirical
distinction between well-being and attitude is not always possible.
    There are some additional limitations of this study. The approach of measuring a child’s well-being only considers a single
aspect of subjective well-being: that related to affect, emotion, or mood. Well-being cannot be comprehensively assessed by
examining only whether a child exhibits a particular mood. Therefore, our study can be classified as a contribution to
research on intrinsic travel-related influences on children’s affective PWB, and not necessarily on other dimensions of
well-being (cognitive, eudaimonic) or related but broader concepts (such as travel satisfaction). From a methodological point

462                                     J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
of view, it should be noted that the PWB assessments used quite general questions, so there is a chance of memory
distortion. We would have preferred to use mobility and activity data in connection with questions of children’s well-
being that are based on one-day or multi-day travel diaries. This would also allow analyzing the influence of trip distances.
Due to the response burden and the different focus of the project in which this study was embedded, such surveys were not
possible. It should also be considered that the survey was conducted on the day of a bicycle training program, which may
have biased the favorable attitudes towards cycling.
    Furthermore, the parent survey contained some inherent limitations. Foremost, the sample size was small (N = 31), so
caution is warranted when attempting to generalize these results, especially those about modal differences in well-being.
Parents also may have had a small incentive to report higher levels of children’s well-being for modes that they or their chil-
dren use more frequently, or for modes that they prefer or that they prefer for their children. However, as our analysis in the
Appendix makes clear, this bias does not appear to have been substantial or systematic. According to the parents’ responses,
the car was the most frequently used mode for parents and the second most frequently used mode for children (see Fig. 3),
yet the car mode was ranked worse on many well-being indicators in Fig. 2. The fact that parents’ modal ratings roughly
matched children’s modal ratings (higher for walking and bicycling, lower for public transport and car use) seems to validate
parental responses.
    As the overall topic was cycling skills, the sample might have been biased because parents with a high affinity for active
lifestyles may have been more likely to volunteer to take part in the interviews; 64% of the parents reported using their bicy-
cle (nearly) every day or 2–3 times a week. We were also unable to prevent social desirability bias from affecting answers by
the parents.
    Some limitations of this study could be addressed through further research. Qualitative research on the usability of faces
scales for children’s (different dimensions of) well-being and subjective interpretation of questions in this field would be
very helpful for the design of survey instruments in the future. Independent variables with regard to the built environment,
household characteristics (e.g., vehicle availability), and psychosocial factors—such as parental concerns and interrelations
between parents’ travel mode to work and parents’ attitudes towards different travel modes—were not included in the anal-
ysis due to a lack of data. These factors may have an impact on the use of active travel modes (e.g. De Vos et al., 2013; Deka,
2013; Flade, 1994; Kalwitzki, 1994; Lopes, Cordovil, & Neto, 2014; Stark et al., 2018), so they should be investigated in future
studies. Additionally, further research with a large heterogeneous sample may provide more information on gender and also
age-related impacts. We would also recommend including non-school trips in the focus of future research. Westman,
Johansson, Olsson, Mårtensson, and Friman (2013) found that children’s experiences of everyday travel varies depending
on where they are going; specifically, experiences during the school journey elicited a lower degree of valence and alertness
than for trips of other purposes.
    Despite these limitations, our study contributes to an increased understanding of active travel-related psychological well-
being among children, an underrepresented aspect within the larger context of research on benefits of active transport.
Although our design does not allow for inferences of causality, it does provide evidence that there are positive associations
between children’s well-being, use of active travel modes, and attitudes towards these modes. The bidirectional relation-
ships between attitudes and PWB (and between travel behavior and PWB) should be analyzed based on representative lon-
gitudinal data sets to derive an overall conceptual causal framework. In this context, additional research is required to gain a
better understanding of the demarcation of attitudes and well-being. Further research can also help to indicate how well-
being can be used in travel behavior models and in the evaluation of transport related projects, programs, and other inter-
ventions. When it comes to convincing adults of the benefits of active mobility, it would be interesting to also inform them of
the cognitive performance of children.
    Overall, we hope that the present analyses will encourage researchers in finding new pathways to understand travel
behavior and well-being relationships among young age groups in general. In this context, a stronger cooperation between
scholars in different disciplines (e.g. mobility, psychology, and health) might be advantageous.
Acknowledgements
Interviews were conducted by Natalie A. Weber and Bernhard Kalteis. We would like to thank all schools for the fruitful
cooperation.
Declaration of conflicting interests
    The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Appendix A
    See Table A1.

                                                   J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465                                          463
Table A1
Spearman’s correlation between frequency of travel mode use (parent, child) and parents’ assessments of well-being (WB) of their children, dependent on main
transport mode used on a given day (N = 31).
                                        Correlation WB-assessment and parent’s frequency of                 Correlation WB-assessment and child’s frequency of
                                        mode use                                                            mode use
                                        Walking            Bicycle           pt               Car           Walking          Bicycle       pt           Car
     Healthy                            0.033                0.008           0.061            0.251         0.141            0.186           0.130      0.160
     Strong/powerful                      0.174              0.310             0.098          0.138         0.059              0.201       0.101        0.183
     Feels well in his/her body           0.167            0.272             0.406              0.081       0.128            0.193         0.164        0.085
     Physically challenged              0.089                0.282           0.371            0.073         0.265              0.110       0.209          0.013
     Fit/sportive                         0.100              0.124           0.484*             0.011       0.173            0.004         0.220          0.075
     Happy                                0.153            0.064             0.420*             0.175       0.252            0.004         0.334          0.119
     Balanced                           0.045                0.105           0.507*           0.209         0.358*           0.105         0.070          0.100
     Self-confident                     0.135              0.132             0.231              0.119         0.172            0.094       0.046          0.216
     Annoyed/angry                      0.135                0.338             0.469*           0.152         0.269            0.234       0.151          0.156
     Unhappy                            0.189              0.081               0.454*           0.172         0.277          0.044         0.064        0.106
     Has physical complaints            0.027              0.140               0.191          0.197         0.358            0.105         0.070          0.100
     Tired                              0.066              0.127               0.008          0.107         0.325            0.161         0.039        0.022
     Uncertain/anxious                    0.679***           0.383*            0.531**        0.108           0.504***         0.192         0.268      0.090
     Stressed/nervous                     0.362*             0.209             0.742***         0.114         0.305            0.090         0.051      0.111
Note: General frequency of travel mode use (5-point scale, the higher the more frequent) and assessments of children’s well-being when using various
travel modes (4-point scale, the higher the degree of agreement with statements about well-being).
   *
      p < 0.05.
  **
      p < 0.01.
 ***
      p < 0.001; two-tailed.
References
Aaronson, N. K., Cull, A. M., Kaasa, S., & Sprangers, M. A. G. (1996). The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) modular
      approach to quality of life assessment in oncology: An update. In B. Spilker (Ed.), Quality of life and pharmaeconomics in clinical trials (pp. 179–190).
      Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978
      (91)90020-T.
Andrews, F. M., & Withey, S. B. (1976). Social indicators of well-being. Americans perceptions of life quality. New York: Plenum.
Aschauer, F. & Stark, J. (2016). Zu Fuß unterwegs sein als Baustein selbstständiger Mobilität von Volksschulkindern. Presentation at X. Österreichische
      Fachkonferenz für FußgängerInnen 2016, Baden, Austria.
Bamberg, S., & Schmidt, P. (1998). Changing travel-mode choice as rational choice: Results from a longitudinal intervention study. Rationality and Society, 10,
      223–252.
Becker, P. (1994). Theoretische Grundlagen. In A. Abele & P. Becker (Eds.), Wohlbefinden: Theorie - empirie - diagnostik (2nd ed., pp. 13–49). Weinheim:
      Juventa.
Bullinger, M. (2009). Well-being in children and adolescents – The state of the art in research and conceptual background. Zeitschrift für
      Gesundheitspsychologie, 17(2), 50–55. https://doi.org/10.1026/0943-8149.17.2.50.
Bullinger, M., & Ravens-Sieberer, U. (1995). Grundlagen, Methoden und Anwendungsgebiete der Lebensqualitätsforschung bei Kindern. Praxis der
      Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie, 44, 391–398.
Bundesministerium für Familie und Jugend (BMFJ) (2016). 7. Bericht zur Lage der Jugend in Österreich.
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155–159.
De Vos, J., Schwanen, T., Van Acker, V., & Witlox, F. (2013). Travel and subjective well-being: A focus on findings, methods and future research needs.
      Transport Reviews, 33(4), 421–442. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2013.815665.
De Vos, J., & Witlox, F. (2017). Travel satisfaction revisited. On the pivotal role of travel satisfaction in conceptualising a travel behaviour process.
      Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 106, 364–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2017.10.009.
Deka, D. (2013). An explanation of the relationship between adults’ work trip mode and children’s school trip mode through the Heckman approach. Journal
      of Transport Geography, 31, 54–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.05.005.
Delbosc, A. (2012). The role of well-being in transport policy. Transport policy, 23, 25–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.06.005.
Diener, E. (1984). Subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 95(3), 542–575.
Diener, E. (2000). Subjective well-being: The science of happiness and a proposal for a national index. American Psychologist, 55(1), 34–43. https://doi.org/
      10.1037/0003-066x.55.1.34.
Diener, E., Wirtz, D., Tov, W., Kim-Prieto, C., Choi, D.-W., Oishi, S., & Diener-Biswar, R. (2010). New well-being measures: short scales to assess flourishing
      and positive and negative feelings. Social Indicators Research, 97(2), 143–156.
Drotar, D. (Ed.). (1998). Measuring health-related quality of life in children and adolescents: Implications for research and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ettema, D., Gärling, T., Eriksson, L., Friman, M., Olsson, L. E., & Fujii, S. (2011). Satisfaction with travel and subjective well-being: Development and test of a
      measurement tool. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 14(3), 167–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2010.11.002.
Festinger, L. (1957). Theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Flade, A. (1994). Der Straßenverkehr aus der Sicht von Schulkindern. In A. Flade, (Ed.) Mobilitätsverhalten. Bedingungen und Veränderungsmöglichkeiten
      aus umweltpsychologischer Sicht (S. 185–194). Weinheim: PsychologieVerlagsUnion.
Frauendienst, B., & Redecker, A. P. (2011). Die Veränderung der selbstständigen Mobilität von Kindern zwischen 1990 und 2010. Zeitschrift für
      Verkehrssicherheit, 57(4), 187–190.
Henerson, M. E., Morris, L. L., & Fitz, C. T. (1987). How to measure attitudes. Newsbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Kalwitzki, K.-P. (1994). Mobilitätsverhalten: Bedingungen und Veränderungen. Verkehrszeichen, 4, 12–18.
Kemen, J. (2016). Mobilität und Gesundheit. Einfluss der Verkehrsmittelnutzung auf die Gesundheit Berufstätiger. Wiesbaden: Springer Spektrum.
Kind, P. (1996). The EuroQOL instrument: An index of health-related quality of life. In B. Spilker (Ed.), Quality of life and pharmaeconomics in clinical trials.
      Philadelphia: Lippin-cott-Raven.
Kroesen, M., Handy, S., & Chorus, C. (2017). Do attitudes cause behavior or vice versa? An alternative conceptualization of the attitude-behavior relationship
      in travel behavior modeling. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 101, 190–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2017.05.013.

464                                                J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465
Leung, K. Y. K., & Loo, B. P. Y. (2017). Association of children’s mobility and wellbeing: A case study in Hong Kong. Travel Behaviour and Society. https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.tbs.2017.07.004.
Limbourg, M., Flade, A., & Schönharting, J. (2000). Mobilität im kindes- und jugendalter. 3-8100-2396-5. Opladen: Verlag Leske und Budrich.
Lopes, F., Cordovil, R., & Neto, C. (2014). Children’s independent mobility in Portugal: Effects of urbanization degree and motorized modes of travel. Journal
    of Transport Geography, 41, 210–219.
Lubans, D. R., Boreham, C. A., Kelly, P., & Foster, C. E. (2011). The relationship between active travel to school and health-related fitness in children and
    adolescents: A systematic review. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-8-5.
Martin, A., Goryakin, Y., & Suhrcke, M. (2014). Does active commuting improve psychological wellbeing? Longitudinal evidence from eighteen waves of the
    British Household Panel Survey. Preventive Medicine, 69, 296–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vpmed.2014.08.023.
Mattejat, F., Jungmann, J., Meusers, M., Moik, C., Schaff, C., Schmidt, M.-H., . . . , Remschmidt, H. (1998). Das Inventar zur Erfassung der Lebensqualität bei
    Kindern und Jugendlichen (ILK).
Nordbakke, S., & Schwanen, T. (2014). Well-being and mobility: A theoretical framework and literature review focusing on older people. Mobilities, 9(1),
    104–129. https://doi.org/10.1080/17450101.2013.784542.
O’Brien, C. (2008). Sustainable happiness: How happiness studies can contribute to a more sustainable future. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne,
    49(4), 289–295. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013235.
Ory, D. T., & Mokhtarian, P. L. (2009). Modeling the structural relationships among short-distance travel amounts, perceptions, affections, and desires.
    Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 43(1), 26–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2008.06.004.
Panter, J., Jones, A., & van Sluijs, E. (2008). Environmental determinants of active travel in youth: A review and framework for future research. International
    Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 5, 34.
Parkany, E., Gallagher, R., & Viveiros, P. (2004). Are attitudes important in travel choice? Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
    Research Board, 1894, 127–139. https://doi.org/10.3141/1894-14.
Patrick, D. L. & Erickson, P. (1988). Assessing health-related quality of life for clinical decision making. In S. Walker & R. M. Rosser (Eds.), Quality of life:
    Assessment and application. Lancaster: MTP Press.
Pollard, E., & Lee, P. (2003). Child well-being: A systematic review of the literature. Social Indicators Research, 61, 59–78.
Ramanathan, S., O’Brien, C., Faulkner, G., & Stone, M. (2014). Happiness in motion: Emotions, well-being, and active school travel. Journal of School Health, 84
    (8), 516–523. https://doi.org/10.1111/josh.12172.
Ramelow, D., Teutsch, F., Hofmann, F., & Felder-Puig, R. (2015). Gesundheit und Gesundheitsverhalten von österreichischen Schülern und Schülerinnen;
    Ergebnisse       des     WHO-HBSC-Survey          2014.     Vienna.      Retrieved    from:     <http://www.bmgf.gv.at/cms/home/attachments/9/7/0/CH1444/
    CMS1427118828092/gesundheit_und_gesundheitsverhalten_oester_schuelerinnen_who-hbsc-survey_2014.pdf> (04 Sept. 2017).
Ravens-Sieberer, U. (2000). Lebensqualitätsansätze in der Pädiatrie. In U. Ravens-Sieberer & A. Cieza (Hrsg.), Lebensqualität und Gesundheitsökonomie in der
    Medizin. Konzepte – Methoden - Anwendungen (277–292). Landsberg: Ecomed.
Reardon, L., & Abdallah, S. (2013). Well-being and transport: Taking stock and looking forward. Transport Reviews, 33(6), 634–657. https://doi.org/10.1080/
    01441647.2013.837117.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Schoeppe, S., Duncan, M. J., Badland, H., Oliver, M., & Curtis, C. (2013). Associations of children’s independent mobility and active travel with physical
    activity, sedentary behaviour and weight status: A systematic review. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 16, 312–319.
Schumacher, J., Klaiberg, A., & Brähler, E. (2003). Diagnostische Verfahren zu Lebensqualität und Wohlbefinden. Diagnostik von Lebensqualität Und
    Wohlbefinden - Eine Einführung: 1–18. In: J. Schumacher, A. Klaiberg, & Brähler, E. (Hrsg.), 2003. Diagnostische Verfahren zu Lebensqualität und
    Wohlbefinden. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Schwenkmezger, P. (1994). Persönlichkeit und Wohlbefinden. In A. Abele & P. Becker (Eds.), Wohlbefinden: Theorie - empirie - diagnostik (2nd ed,
    pp. 119–138). Weinheim: Juventa.
Shaw, B., Bicket, M., Elliott, B., Fagan-Watson, B., Mocca, E., & Hillman, M. (2015). Children’s independent mobility: An international comparison and
    recommendations for action. London: Policy Studies Institute.
Shaw, B., Watson, B., Frauendienst, B., Redecker, A., Jones, T., & Hillman, M. (2013). Children’s independent mobility: A comparative study in England and
    Germany (1971–2010). London: Policy Studies Institute.
Singleton, P. A. (2017). Exploring the positive utility of travel and mode choice (PhD dissertation). Portland: Portland State University. 10.15760/etd.5664.
Singleton, P. A. (2018). Walking (and cycling) to well-being: Modal and other determinants of subjective well-being during the commute. Travel Behaviour
    and Society. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2018.02.005.
Singleton, P. A., & Clifton, K. J. (2017). Towards measures of the positive utility of travel: Affective and eudaimoinc travel subjective well-being. Presented at
    the 11th International Conference on Transport Survey Methods, Estérel, QC.
Singleton, P. A., & Mokhtarian, P. L. (in preparation). Is there a positive utility of travel? A review of concepts, methods, and evidence. Available from the
    authors.
Stark, J., Bartana, I., & Fritz, A. (2015). Examining Mobility Behaviour among Youth - A Progress Report. Transportation Research Procedia, 11, 481–491.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2015.12.040.
Stark, J., Frühwirth, J., & Aschauer, F. (2018). Exploring independent and active mobility in primary school children in Vienna. Journal of Transport Geography,
    68, 31–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2018.02.007.
St-Louis, E., Manaugh, K., van Lierop, D., & El-Geneidy, A. (2014). The happy commuter: A comparison of commuter satisfaction across modes. Transportation
    Research Part F, 26, 160–170.
Thaller, M., Schnabel, F., & Gollner, E. (2014). Schoolwalker – eine Initiative zur gesundheits- und umweltbewussten Mobilität bei Kindern. Prävention und
    Gesundheitsförderung, 2, 111–116. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11553-013-0425-y.
Västfjäll, D., Friman, M., Gärling, T., & Kleiner, M. (2002). The measurement of core affect: A Swedish self-report measure derived from the affect circumplex.
    Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 43(1), 19–31. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9450.00265.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063–1070.
Waygood, E. O. D., Friman, M., Olsson, L. E., & Taniguchi, A. (2017). Transport and child well-being: An integrative review. Travel Behaviour and Society.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2017.04.005.
Waygood, E., Friman, M., Olsson, L., & Taniguichi, A. (2015). Transport and child well-being. Journal of Transport & Health, 2(2), S62–S63. https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.jth.2015.04.599.
Waygood, E., & Kitamura, R. (2009). Children in a rail-based developed area of Japan. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
    Board, 2125, 36–43. https://doi.org/10.3141/2125-05.
Westman, J., Johansson, M., Olsson, L. E., Mårtensson, F., & Friman, M. (2013). Children’s affective experience of every-day travel. Journal of Transport
    Geography, 29, 95–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.01.003.
Westman, J., Olsson, L. E., Gärling, T., & Friman, M. (2017). Children’s travel to school: Satisfaction, current mood, and cognitive performance. Transportation,
    44(6), 1365–1382. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-016-9705-7.
WHOQOL-Group (1994). The development of the World Health Organization quality of life assessment instrument: The WHOQOL. In J. Orley & W. Kuyken
    (Eds.), Quality of life assessment: International perspectives (pp. 41–57). Berlin: Springer.
Winther Topp, C., Ostergaard, S. D., & Sondergaard, S. (2015). The WHO-5 well-being index: A systematic review of literature. Psychotherapy and
    Psychosomatics, 84, 167–176. https://doi.org/10.1159/000376585.

                                                   J. Stark et al. / Transportation Research Part F 56 (2018) 453–465                                      465
Wydra, G. (2014). Der Fragebogen zum allgemeinen habituellen Wohlbefinden (FAHW und FAHW-12) - Entwicklung und Evaluation eines
   mehrdimensionalen Fragebogens. Saarbrücken.
Zwerts, E., Allaert, G., Janssens, D., Wets, G., & Witlox, F. (2010). How children view their travel behaviour: A case study from Flanders (Belgium). Journal of
   Transport Geography, 18(6), 702–710. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2009.10.002.

