

Journal of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Journal of Transport Geography
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jtrangeo
Towards an interdisciplinary science of transport and health: a case study
on school travel
Susan Hodgson a, Anil Namdeo b, Vera Araujo-Soares a, Tanja Pless-Mulloli a,<U+21D1>
a
Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, The Baddiley-Clark Building, Richardson Road, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4AX, United Kingdom
b
Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
a r t i c l e           i n f o                           a b s t r a c t
Keywords:                                                 Background and aim: This paper was conceptualised and informed by discussions at the 2nd Workshop in
Transport                                                 a UKTRC funded series on ‘Social Impacts and Equity in Transport’. Presentations made by a range of
Health                                                    stakeholders as well as a specially commissioned play stimulated our thoughts on how to encourage bet-
Sustainability                                            ter interaction between health and transport researchers. We chose school travel as a case study as it
Behaviour change
exempli<U+FB01>es two key aspects of the wider transport and health debates; (i) the increasing trend towards
Transport choice
Health behaviour
reliance on car travel, described here in the context of sedentary lifestyles, traf<U+FB01>c congestion, pollution,
and parental attitudes, and (ii) school travel occurs at a critical life-stage during which behaviour patterns
are formed that are likely to be in<U+FB02>uential in later life, thus making it an important target point for inter-
ventions.
Methods: We present evidence from four distinct, but complementary, theoretical perspectives: trans-
port, exposure, behaviour and sustainability. We draw common lessons and identify challenges using a
range of conceptual frameworks: integrated psychological model of transport choices, Dahlgren and
Whitehead’s ‘layers of in<U+FB02>uence’ model, Hosking et al.’s ‘pathways from transport to health’, and Hanlon
et al.’s integral theory. We demonstrate the bene<U+FB01>ts and challenges of holistic interaction and collabora-
tion between disciplines to better understand the key issues and develop policy interventions that are
meaningful and effective.
Results and conclusions: None of the pre-existing conceptual models were fully able to encompass the
societal and individual level in<U+FB02>uences on school travel. However, we present an interim model for fur-
ther discussion and debate.
Ó 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
1. Introduction                                                                               associated with these conditions, including cardiovascular disease,
type 2 diabetes, cancer, osteoarthritis and work disability.
Transport and health are interlinked on many levels, with trans-                             Furthermore, road transport is directly responsible for a signif-
port directly and indirectly in<U+FB02>uencing health, and health status                             icant burden of morbidity and mortality; in Great Britain, in 2009,
in<U+FB02>uencing transport options.                                                                 there were 163,554 road accidents reported to the police involving
Many of the positive and negative health consequences associ-                            personal injury, and 2222 traf<U+FB01>c related deaths (National Statistics,
ated with transport are well acknowledged: Motorised vehicles are                             2009). In contrast, ‘active transport’ (walking and cycling) is seen
known as a source of localised air pollution and greenhouse gas                               to be associated with a wide range of health bene<U+FB01>ts (Haskell
emissions. Air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions in turn im-                             et al., 2009; Johan de Hartog et al., 2010), and reduced greenhouse
pact directly on respiratory and cardiac health in exposed popula-                            gas/air pollution emissions (Dennekamp and Carey, 2010; Lindsay
tions (COMEAP, 2006; Hoek et al., 2002; Le Tertre et al., 2002), and                          et al., 2011; Rissel, 2009). However, despite the acknowledged ben-
contribute to indirect health effects of climate change (World                                e<U+FB01>ts of active transport, there has been a 24% decline in the num-
Health Organization, 2009). Motorised transport also contributes                              ber of trips made on foot (292–221 trips per person per year 1995/
to our increasingly sedentary lifestyle (Hill and Peters, 1998),                              1997–2008 (Department for Transport, 2009), and a decline in the
which in turn play a part in growing proportions of the population                            number of primary and secondary school children walking to
being overweight and obese. Numerous secondary health risks are                               school (53% and 42% in 1995/1997 versus 48% and 40% in 2008)
for primary and secondary school children respectively) (Depart-
ment for Transport, 2009). In the UK, up to 40% of the road traf<U+FB01>c
<U+21D1> Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 (0) 191 222 7211; fax: +44 (0) 191 222 8752.              in the morning peak hour is now estimated to be involved in some
E-mail address: tanja.pless-mulloli@ncl.ac.uk (T. Pless-Mulloli).                        way in the school run (Mudu et al., 2006).
0966-6923/$ - see front matter Ó 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2012.01.011


























































S. Hodgson et al. / Journal
Our transport systems affect our ability to access work, educa-
tion and services, as well as social activities, all of which are impor-
tant for maintaining health and wellbeing. However, transport and
transport availability is not equitably spread across the population.
People on low incomes, in chronic ill-health, or with limited mobil-
ity may be less able to access or pay for the transport systems they
need to acquire work, education and services (Jarvis and Alvanides,
2008). Those on low incomes are also more likely to suffer the ad-
verse effects of road traf<U+FB01>c, for instance exposure to air pollution
and noise (Marshall et al., 2009; Namdeo and Stringer, 2008;
O’Neill et al., 2003). Mitchell and Dorling (2003) completed a com-
prehensive review of UK air quality social equity studies and con-
cluded that most studies investigating the relationship between air
quality and deprivation, tended to show that air pollution is great-
er in more deprived communities (Mitchell and Dorling, 2003).
These inequalities are complex (Briggs et al., 2008a,b; Deguen
and Zmirou-Navier, 2010), but can be framed within the theory
of environmental justice, in that some groups are disproportion-
ately subject to environmental hazards and disadvantage predis-
posing them to poor health (Gee and Payne-Sturges, 2004).
It is becoming increasingly recognised that patterns of behav-
iour established in infancy and childhood in<U+FB02>uence later behav-
iour, meaning that disadvantage in childhood may exert a
lifelong health and social affect. Physical activity, smoking, and diet
are socially patterned, with behaviours established in adolescence
being shown to ‘track’ into adulthood (Due et al., 2011). In the con-
text of travel and health, travel behaviours established in child-
hood may set the pattern for healthful or less healthful
behaviours throughout the life course. However, a more detailed
understanding of the development of such pathways is still very
much needed to design effective, sustainable and acceptable poli-
cies that will encourage more healthful travel behaviour.
In this paper we have outlined some key concepts related to
transport and health; we use knowledge, skills and evidence from
the areas of transport and exposure science, civil engineering,
health psychology and behaviour change as well as sustainability,
to reach an interdisciplinary understanding of the relations be-
tween transport and health set in the context of school travel in
the developed countries.


2. Materials and methods

This paper was informed by discussions held at the 2nd Work-
shop in a UKTRC funded series entitled ‘Social Impacts and Equity
in Transport’. The series aimed to promote interdisciplinary collab-
oration and capacity building; to better equip researchers, policy-
makers and practitioners across the different social science and
transport disciplines to address the social challenges of providing
transport and access, and to maximise the social bene<U+FB01>ts of the
transport system within the UK context, now and in the future.
The 2nd Workshop explored transport and health, and aimed to
highlight both the linkages between transport and health, and be-
tween health and transport choices. The workshop, held over
2 days, brought together 27 participants from local councils, gov-
ernment agencies, academia, transport NGOs, the NHS, transport
providers and transport consultancies, more details of the work-
shop, speakers and participants are available from the workshop
report, which is available from the Transport Studies Unit website
(Pless-Mulloli et al., 2011).
Discussion was stimulated by eight presentations made by rep-
resentatives from local government, the NHS, transport providers,
academics and transport relevant NGOs, as well as by a specially
commissioned play entitled ‘Doors Opening, Doors Closing’ by
playwright Carol Clewlow (www.ncl.ac.uk/ihs/news/item/?doors-
opening-doors-closing1-copy1-copy). The play, set on a Metro car-
of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79                                        71
riage, explored the links between transport problems and general
health and wellbeing. In the play regular Metro users converse
with an occasional user, ‘forced’ to use the Metro as his car was
being serviced. Regular users are widely differing characters – a fe-
male student, a cycle and Metro enthusiast, and a pensioner. The
occasional user is a radio traf<U+FB01>c reporter who loves his car. He talks
about the advantages of using the car and sees his position chal-
lenged by the other characters who remind him of the state of
the country’s roads, of the constant queues and tailbacks that he
reports about every day. Meanwhile the Metro stops on the tracks
and Humankind’s struggle for transport, and its implications on life
are discussed. At the close of the play an interactive forum with the
audience took place. The actors, remaining ‘in character’ were
questioned by the audience to enliven further debate on issues
associated with transport. The play, together with the scienti<U+FB01>c
presentations, was able to communicate key concepts at different
levels of knowing which mutually supported the learning from
other disciplines. The idea was to bring together different perspec-
tives, knowledge and experiences to generate discussion on the key
issues and trends, and skills and policy needs, around this complex
issue of transport and health.
A key methodological issue raised at the workshop was the
need to encourage more interaction between health and transport
researchers, and to develop methods to move the research and pol-
icy agendas forwards in a more holistic manner. Picking up on this
suggestion in this paper we approach this need for interdisciplina-
rity by using the case study of school travel from a number of dis-
tinct, but complementary, theoretical perspectives, in an attempt
to demonstrate the bene<U+FB01>ts of interaction between disciplines to
better understand this important topic.


3. Results

3.1. Transport

The journey to and from school is part of the everyday routine
for most children, and for many parents or guardians who escort
their children. As part of the trend towards adult supervision of
children on journeys and at play, parents in Western societies
are increasingly ‘chauffeuring’ their children to and from school
(Davison et al., 2008; Dowling, 2000; Valentine, 1996). The UK
Department for Transport estimated that a total of 41% of 5–
10 year olds in the UK travel to school by car (Department for
Transport, 2009). The proportion of children walking to school
has declined, and car use for journeys to school has increased. Sim-
ilar data from the US National Personal Transportation Survey re-
vealed that the number of students who walked or cycled to
school decreased from 41% in 1969 to only 13% in 2001 (McDonald,
2007).
Another characteristic measured in transport surveys is the
average journey length to school. According to the National Travel
Survey (NTS) for Great Britain there has been an increase in the
average journey length to school over the period 1985/1986–
2004 by about 800 m, although the average journey length remains
short at about 2.3 km for children under 11 and 4.7 km for children
aged 11–16 (Pooley et al., 2005). Increased car ownership is con-
sidered to be a major factor in the growth of school journey lengths
(Department for Transport, 2001).
This changing pattern in journeys to school has been linked not
only to road safety and pollution but also to the fears of potential
harm triggered at least in part by much-publicised child abduc-
tions and concerns about ‘stranger dangers’ (Matthews et al.,
2000; Timperio et al., 2006; Valentine, 1997). A set of powerful cul-
tural expectations seems to have developed around parental roles,
overwhelmingly falling to mothers, who feel the need to transport

72                                            S. Hodgson et al. / Journal
children between different activities. Sanger, 2005 suggested that
in highly suburbanised Western cities, ‘driving provide(s) evidence
of good parenting and mileage the measure of maternal contribu-
tion to familial welfare’ (Sanger, 2005). This is symptomatic of the
school run that is undertaken by many parents because it seems to
make sense in terms of safety, family life and time/money budget
constraints (Timperio et al., 2006).
In line with the impacts other users of transport experience,
children encounter a range of hazards in the urban environment
which have been well documented. Much focus has been on
threats posed by motor vehicles, with growing traf<U+FB01>c volumes
linked to heightened risk of child pedestrian injury, as well as air
pollution, noise and the loss of safe play spaces (Dixey, 1998;
Yeung et al., 2008). However, the growth in ownership and use
of the ‘freedom-giving’ car has also been associated with a decline
in children’s freedom of movement and their ability to negotiate
public space independent of adult supervision (Dixey, 1998; Hill-
man, 1993). It has been argued that similar barriers to use exist
for young people when they consider transport modes: namely
perceived reliability, convenience, cost, quality and safety (Yeung
et al., 2008). Despite the accepted health bene<U+FB01>ts of walking
(Lumsden and Mitchell, 1999; Sjole and Thuen, 2002; Wen et al.,
2008), in some Western cities walking has become an almost coun-
ter-cultural activity, and ‘a sign of powerlessness or low status’
(Solnit, 2000). The marginal status of walking is often accentuated
by narrow (or non-existent) footpaths, heavy traf<U+FB01>c volumes and a
paucity of places to cross roads in safety.
When undertaken by car, school journeys can make a signi<U+FB01>cant
contribution to local traf<U+FB01>c generation increasing congestion and
pollution (Collins and Kearns, 2001; Hillman, 1995; Joshi and Ma-
clean, 1995; Kearns and Collins, 2003; Sjole and Thuen, 2002). The
start of a new school year sees a 20% increase in traf<U+FB01>c as a result of
the ‘school run’ and in the last 10 years the proportion of pupils
participating in that run has almost doubled to an extra million
every day (Department for Transport, 2009). Pattern of school tra-
vel creates serious delays and bottlenecks close to schools with
resultant safety issues. There is now an extensive geographical lit-
erature on traf<U+FB01>c generation in towns, including the effect of the
school run on urban congestion, and on potential strategies,
including school travel plans, walking trains, safer route initiatives
and cycling to schools, to reduce traf<U+FB01>c volumes and create more
sustainable urban transport systems (Docherty and Shaw, 2003;
Tolley, 1990; Whitelegg, 1997, 2003).
As more children are escorted to school by car their indepen-
dence is reduced, and they are deprived of exercise that would
otherwise be gained from walking to school. A recent systematic
review conducted by Lubans et al. to explore associations between
active travel to school and health related <U+FB01>tness in children and
adolescents found a positive association between active travel to
school and cardio-respiratory <U+FB01>tness, though equivocal evidence
for the relationship with muscular <U+FB01>tness or <U+FB02>exibility (Lubans
et al., 2008). The health-promoting aspects of active travel to
school are perceived by many parents to be offset by the safety
concerns highlighted above (e.g. (Timperio et al., 2006), as well
as time constraints (Black et al., 2001; Cooper et al., 2008; DiG-
uiseppi et al., 1998; Dixey, 1998; Matthews et al., 2000). Some evi-
dence suggests that walking or bicycling to school is associated
with increased total physical activity among children. In a study
of 114 children in Bristol, UK, Cooper et al. (2003) found that male
youths who walked to school were signi<U+FB01>cantly more physically
active during the entire day and during after-school hours than
were boys who did not walk to school (Cooper et al., 2003).
Issues of school transport and safety are currently the focus of
much debate by policy makers, local authorities, schools, parents,
pupils, the police and various interest groups. The House of Com-
mons Transport Committee considered the issue of school trans-
of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79
port in 2004, concluding that congestion caused by parents
undertaking the ‘school run’ in cars is unacceptably high and that
procedures need to be implemented to encourage pupils to walk,
cycle or use public transport for their journeys to and from school
(House of Commons Transport Committee, 2004). Schools across
the UK have been responding to the challenge to adopt a new ap-
proach to the school run. Initiatives include a variety of ways to
integrate road safety education into the school curriculum. Exam-
ples of ‘best practice’ in school transport provision from around the
developed world include safer route initiatives, walking buses, cy-
cling trains, school travel plans, travel co-ordinators, car sharing,
the yellow school bus model, safe transport initiatives, education
and resources, working on the assumption that a safer route makes
children more likely to walk and cycle to school (Boarnet et al.,
2005; Kingham and Ussher, 2007).
In summary, there has been a trend over the past few decades
for journeys to school to be made increasingly by car, and although
journey length has increased, distances remain easily achievable
using active forms of transport. The reasons behind this increasing
car use are many, but include issues (real and perceived) of road
safety, pollution, and child safety, as well as cultural expectations.
A signi<U+FB01>cant downside of the increased reliance on the car for
school journeys is the associated decline in children’s freedom of
movement and independence, as well as a missed opportunity
for exercise, with knock-on impacts on cardio-respiratory <U+FB01>tness
and total physical activity. In an attempt to remedy the pollution,
congestion and safety issues associated with the over-reliance on
the car for these daily journeys, and to maximise the health bene-
<U+FB01>ts of active transport in school children, these issues are now the
focus of debate by a wide range of stake holders, with various ini-
tiatives being implemented and evaluated in the UK and beyond.

3.2. Exposure

It is now well established that long term exposure to low levels
of air pollution has a long term impact on health (COMEAP, 2006),
and that commuters and those travelling during ‘rush hour’ are
likely to be exposed to relatively high concentrations of air pollu-
tion (Zuurbier et al., 2010). However, there is relatively sparse evi-
dence quantifying pollution levels associated with different modes
of transport in the context of school travel.
Although not speci<U+FB01>c to school travel, some studies have re-
ported that walking and cycling, key components of active trans-
port, compared to other forms of transport, are associated with
exposure to lower levels of health relevant pollutants including
particulate matter and carbon monoxide (Adams et al., 2001; Du
et al., 2010; Kaur and Nieuwenhuijsen, 2009). However other stud-
ies have found the opposite to be the case, for example suggesting
that walking is associated with exposure to higher levels of various
particulate matter fractions than driving (Briggs et al., 2008a,b;
Mudu et al., 2006). Studies exploring pollution levels associated
with different modes of travel in various locations around the
world have also been relatively inconsistent, with many studies
reporting transport mode to be important in determining expo-
sure, but with transport modes being ordered differently, in terms
of mean pollutant levels, depending on the pollutant of interest
(Lee and Jo, 2002; Zuurbier et al., 2010).
Whilst the evidence linking travel mode to pollution exposure
does not all point in the same direction the evidence on pollution
levels decreasing with distance from heavy traf<U+FB01>c is consistent
(Harrison et al., 2009; Johnson et al., 2000). Pollution levels are
consistently associated with traf<U+FB01>c volume (Harrison et al., 2009;
Rotko et al., 2001). Season, route and ventilation of the vehicles
(e.g. open windows) all in<U+FB02>uence the level of exposure (Lee and
Jo, 2002; Sabin et al., 2005; Zhu et al., 2007; Zuurbier et al.,
2010). The interactions between these factors are likely to

S. Hodgson et al. / Journal
contribute to the inconsistencies observed in exposures associated
with different transport modes described above.
While several studies have measured mean pollutant levels
associated with different travel modes, the time spend in these dif-
ferent ‘micro-environments’ is another important factor determin-
ing exposure, which has been less explored. In the UK, in 2000,
children were found to spend 5.4% of their time travelling (Of<U+FB01>ce
for National Statistics, 2000). Therefore, while children spend rela-
tively little time travelling, this time can still be an important
source of pollution exposure. For instance, a study in Los Angeles
found that although school bus commutes represented only 10%
of child’s day in terms of time, this commute contributed a third
of the child’s black carbon exposure on school days (Behrentz
et al., 2005). While some (but not all) studies have found walking
the same route to be associated with lower pollution levels than
motorised modes of transport, the additional time taken to walk
a route can mean that the cumulative exposure associated with
this mode is higher than for other modes (Briggs et al., 2008a,b).
Clearly the route chosen may depend on the travel mode (i.e. if
walking, school children may chose to walk a route with lower
traf<U+FB01>c volume), but, as stated above, the travel mode, route and mi-
cro-environment, in conjunction with other factors, all in<U+FB02>uence
exposure. The time spent in a speci<U+FB01>c transport micro-environ-
ment is not the only factor determining exposure; breathing rates,
which are likely to be higher for active modes of transport, will
play a role in determining the quantity of air taken into the lungs,
and will therefore also in<U+FB02>uence exposure and dose (Kaur and Nie-
uwenhuijsen, 2009). Taking these factors into account suggest that
pedestrians might have a higher air pollution exposure than car
occupants, however this exposure is likely to be offset by other
health related advantages, such as generally being more active
(Mackett and Paskins, 2008; van Sluijs et al., 2009) and opportuni-
ties for socialisation (Mudu et al., 2006).
Proximity to road traf<U+FB01>c, like many of the factors mentioned
above, is socio-economically patterned. Whilst in developing coun-
tries proximity to roads is seen as providing access to transport, in
the developed world those who can afford it are likely to choose
living away from busy roads and traf<U+FB01>c, with more deprived indi-
viduals tending to live in areas closer to heavy traf<U+FB01>c and/or high
traf<U+FB01>c volumes (Marshall et al., 2009).
This suggests that there might be an additional socio-economic
impact in<U+FB02>uencing exposure within the same mode of transport
(i.e. walking in a deprived (high traf<U+FB01>c) area might confer higher
exposure than walking in an af<U+FB02>uent (traf<U+FB01>c calmed) area,
although to date little research has been carried out to explore this.
Studies also suggest that socio-economically disadvantaged groups
are more reliant on active transport (Adams, 2010) and active
transport for school travel (Jarvis and Alvanides, 2008). These
inequalities in exposure and choice of transport mode are likely
to contribute to the environmental injustice faced by more de-
prived groups. Furthermore, these inequalities may be exacerbated
by ‘choices’ more available to others. For instance, school choice
policies, as an alternative to children being assigned to neighbour-
hood schools, have been embraced by more af<U+FB02>uent groups, often
at the cost of attending a school further from their place of resi-
dence, requiring a return car or bus journey to be made, increasing
traf<U+FB01>c volume, congestion and exposure experience by others (Jar-
vis and Alvanides, 2008; Wilson et al., 2007).
In summary, exposure to air pollution has an impact on health,
and commuters, including children travelling to school, are likely
to be exposed to relatively high levels of various air pollutants.
Although children spend a relatively short proportion of their time
engaging in school travel, this time can still be an important source
of pollution exposure. Different transport modes are associated
with different levels of air pollution exposure, in<U+FB02>uenced by a vari-
ety of factors including distance from heavy traf<U+FB01>c, traf<U+FB01>c volume,
of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79                                        73
season, route, ventilation and breathing rates. Some of these fac-
tors are socio-economically patterned, with more deprived individ-
uals tending to live in areas closer to heavy traf<U+FB01>c and/or high
traf<U+FB01>c volumes, and with some evidence showing that disadvan-
taged groups are more reliant on active transport and active trans-
port for school travel, potentially exacerbating inequalities in
health relevant exposures.


3.3. Behaviour

Understanding how individuals and families make transport
choices based on current socio-economic, cultural and environ-
mental conditions is key to in<U+FB02>uencing travel behaviours. Behav-
ioural science has developed a range of theories, intervention
techniques and evaluation paradigms which have the potential to
contribute to our understanding of how individuals make transport
choices, how these choices are constrained by the socio-cultural
environment and how these choices can be supported and modi-
<U+FB01>ed through policy and other level interventions (Michie et al.,
2011a). Transport-oriented policies/interventions can have a great
impact on behaviour change. The Behaviour Change Wheel de-
scribed in the Michie et al. 2011a paper, cited above, describes dis-
tinct intervention (activities designed to in<U+FB02>uence behaviour)
functions. These can include education, persuasion, training and
modelling on one hand and incentivisation, coercion, restriction,
environmental restructuring and enablement on the other. Inter-
vention development can emerge from legislation brought up by
political authorities and/or can act by supporting individual/family
decision making. This knowledge can support intervention
development.
In a systematic review of interventions to promote walking
(Ogilvie et al., 2007) a small non-randomised trial of an active com-
muting pack, found a signi<U+FB01>cant increase in self-reported walking
on the school journey amongst 9-year old school children (McKee
et al., 2007). The intervention included written curriculum materi-
als on active travel for teachers to use during school classes as well
as children and family information packs that aimed to support the
planning of active journeys to school. Intervention strategies in-
cluded: goal setting for changing travel to school; self monitoring
via an activity/transport diary, and; information on how to be a
safe pedestrian. These results demonstrate that a behavioural
intervention might be effective in facilitating active travel to
school. However, another systematic review targeting organisa-
tional travel plans included 10 intervention studies delivered in
school settings (Hosking et al., 2010) and did not <U+FB01>nd evidence
for the effectiveness of the interventions, including the installation
of a school travel coordinator (Rowland et al., 2003) or a complex
intervention targeting student, teachers, parents and councils in
Australia (Web et al., 2010).
This brief review of interventions demonstrates that knowledge
about how to in<U+FB02>uence transport choice is limited to date. Method-
ological quality of studies has been variable, interventions tested to
date have not utilised evidenced theory of behaviour change and
intervention techniques used are usually poorly reported (Dom-
browski et al., in press). Interventions used a limited set of change
techniques mainly focussing on (i) providing opportunities for
behaviour change (e.g. safe walking or cycling routes; walking
bus); (ii) engineering measures (e.g. pedestrian crossings and foot-
paths improvements); (iii) promotional measures for alternative
transport (e.g. walk to school days), or; (iv) educational measures
(e.g. focus on the bene<U+FB01>ts of active transport). However, there are
great opportunities for knowledge transfer utilising existing theo-
ries (Web et al., 2010) and behaviour change techniques (Abraham
and Michie, 2008; Michie et al., 2011b) established and evidenced
in the <U+FB01>eld of health related behaviour change.

74                                            S. Hodgson et al. / Journal
Partaking in active transport for school travel, i.e. walking or cy-
cling with a child to school, is a behaviour that is ultimately in<U+FB02>u-
enced by a range of policy and socio-cultural factors constraining
the available options while still leaving degrees of freedom for
individual choice. Psychological theory suggests that environmen-
tal and contextual factors interact with individual factors to ex-
plain inter-individual and intra-individual variability in transport
choice. There is now compelling evidence that human behaviour
is directed both by re<U+FB02>ective and reasoned as well as impulsive
and often unconscious modes of decision making (e.g. habits and
impulsive/automatic responses to environmental stimuli) to shape
behaviours (Hofmann et al., 2008; Strack and Deutsch, 2004).
Moreover, self-regulation strategies can be used to override impul-
sive forms of responding in favour of more intentional choices.
Fig. 1 illustrates the relationships between the environmental/con-
textual, re<U+FB02>ective, and impulsive modes of decision making and
self-regulation, which are described in brief below.


3.3.1. Re<U+FB02>ective decision making
The common idea of decision making is that of an expectancy
value model (Fishbein, 1967). According to this model, individuals
hold expectations about the consequences of various options, and
weigh up the pros and cons, estimate the chances that these con-
sequences will occur, and chose the option which gives them the
best value with the highest likelihood. While we know today that
human decision making is not as systematic as this model suggests
(Gigerenzer, 2000; Kahneman and Tversky, 1973), the two main
ideas that people chose options which have more pros than cons
(e.g., outcome expectations, expected utility) and are achievable
(controllability; self-ef<U+FB01>cacy) are well supported by evidence (Ash-
ford et al., 2010; Bandura, 1997; Schoemaker, 1982). In terms of
outcomes and utility, there is evidence that people are more likely
to respond to immediate, certain, positive and affective outcomes
than to long-term, uncertain, negative and cognitive outcomes
(Conner et al., 2011). With respect to school travel, choosing what
is perceived as a familiar, convenient and controllable option (e.g.
Fig. 1. An integrated psych
of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79
the car) might often be prioritised over active transport options,
despite these alternatives being widely acknowledged as better
for long term health or the environment.
Initial transport decisions may indeed often be made on a
re<U+FB02>ective basis. Consider, for example, a family who, for the <U+FB01>rst
time, are deciding how to escort their children to school. For this
initial occasion a number of relevant factors are considered and
weighted such as distance to school, road safety, quality of the
footpaths, traf<U+FB01>c congestion, and time constraints (Black et al.,
2001; Cooper et al., 2008; DiGuiseppi et al., 1998; Dixey, 1998;
Matthews et al., 2000). The structures and organization of our cit-
ies, towns and neighbourhoods will in<U+FB02>uence this initial decision
and will make it more likely, for a family with a heightened percep-
tion of negative outcome expectancies and perceived low self-ef<U+FB01>-
cacy on walking or cycling to school, to decide for the car. These
expectations might not necessarily match to people’s outcome
experiences. In sum, salience, attractiveness, access, proximity
and costs of distinct transport mode options are some of the fea-
tures that can determine our initial choices.


3.3.2. Associative modes of behavioural decision making
Not all behaviours are driven by re<U+FB02>ective decision making;
habits are automatic responses to environmental stimuli acquired
through repeated performance in a speci<U+FB01>c context (Triandis,
1977). Habits are an adaptive mode of behavioural regulation
allowing shortcuts in decision making without using limited cogni-
tive resources (Lally et al., 2010). When facing the context (acting
as the cue) the automatic response will be the habitual behaviour.
After initial transport choices have been made, the daily commute
to school is likely to develop habitual features, e.g., no need for ac-
tive intent, control or awareness (Bargh, 1994). Once behavioural
habits are in place, families might maintain their regular mode of
transport, even if everyday experiences are unfavourable (e.g. con-
tinued car use by habit, even if traf<U+FB01>c congestion makes this an
unreliable choice). Life span associated changes, including starting
school, moving from primary to secondary school, or even policy
ological model of transport choices.

S. Hodgson et al. / Journal
induced contextual changes can be a crucial window for behaviour
change and allow for the dissolution of old habits through the use
of active self regulatory strategies.

3.3.3. Changing transport behaviours
Regular transport behaviours are likely to be the result of habits
or associative responses to environmental cues (e.g., weather).
Methods to change automatic behaviours might therefore include:

(i) Prompting a conscious review of the ease and expected out-
comes/utility of the full range of available transport options,
for example using a ‘decisional balance sheet’ listing the pros
and cons of the options with a focus upon affective, proximal
and immediate outcomes (enjoyment, relaxation, experi-
ence) of each option.
(ii) Validating beliefs about expected outcomes/utility and ease
of use. Beliefs held about transport modes are not necessar-
ily accurate and in correspondence with experienced out-
comes/utilities. Prompting a re<U+FB02>ection comparing expected
and experienced outcomes/utility using experience sam-
pling (Hektner et al., 2007), ecological momentary assess-
ment tools that elicit self monitoring in real time settings
(Shiffman et al., 2008) or simple self-monitoring diaries
can help re-evaluate choices and make better decisions,
based on a review of the salience of alternative transports.
(iii) Changing utility structures of transport choices. Environ-
mental changes (e.g. brought about by policy measures) that
increase the perceived utility of one choice over another
making healthful options easier, safer, cheaper, more attrac-
tive and socially accepted.
(iv) Supporting self regulation. Although families may have good
intentions to use sustainable and active transport modes,
they may succumb to the temptation of using the car if they
are running late or when it is raining. Simple self regulation
techniques, such as prompting people to actively remember
the reasons for their choices and challenging the tempta-
tions to violate these reasons by setting goals and forming
action/coping plans (e.g. having rain gear readily available)
(Sniehotta, 2009) might help people persevere with good
intentions in situations where time pressure and stress
make active re<U+FB02>ections more dif<U+FB01>cult.

In summary, changing transport behaviours can be achieved
through external policy, environmental and individual interven-
tions (Michie et al., 2011a). An understanding that not all
day-to-day transport decisions are made based on re<U+FB02>ection and
deliberation helps to direct these efforts to interrupt habits and
automaticity and set the ground for new, better decisions. Taxono-
mies for scienti<U+FB01>c methods for changing individual behaviours have
been worked out for physical activity and dietary behaviours
(Michie et al., 2011b). It would be useful for the <U+FB01>eld of transport
behaviours to establish a similar framework to be able to fully de-
scribe and better report the methods used to affect transport
choices.

3.4. Sustainability

Considering school transport and health in the context of sus-
tainability is still very novel. As is illustrated in the previous sec-
tions there are bodies of evidence from the <U+FB01>elds of transport
research, exposure science, behaviour science, and public health,
however they are not commonly contextualised within sustain-
ability as a framework. The terminology of co-bene<U+FB01>ts between
air pollution and climate change policies and management has
been used for a number of years and is re<U+FB02>ected in a body of evi-
dence (Chapman, 2007; Creutzig and He, 2009; Thambrian and
of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79                                          75
Dian, 2011), but none of these papers considered school travel as
an example or case study.
McMichael et al. argued in 2003, that ‘‘much early discussion
about sustainability has focused on readily measurable intermediate
outcomes such as increased economic performance, greater energy
ef<U+FB01>ciency, better urban design, improved transport systems, better
conservation of recreational amenities, and so on. However, such
changes in technologies, behaviours, amenities, and equity are only
the means to attaining desired human experiential outcomes, includ-
ing autonomy, opportunity, security, and health. These are the true
ends of sustainability’’ (McMichael et al., 2003).
A recent paper by Hosking et al. (2011) entitled: ‘How can we
best intervene in the trip to school? Pathways from transport to health’
goes a long way in developing a conceptual model of the decisions
that contribute to the choices on how school journeys are being
made whilst simultaneously considering health improvement
and sustainability. The diagram they developed in the paper con-
ceptualised how interventions directed at multiple levels can in<U+FB02>u-
ence school travel and consequently health. This model included
interventions at six levels; the global, national, city, neighbour-
hood, school and family levels. These six levels of intervention
in<U+FB02>uence both the quantity and quality of school transport deci-
sions (i.e. the number of walking trips to and from school), which
in<U+FB02>uence travel related factors such as the quality and quantity of
travel, which in turn in<U+FB02>uence health risk factors, such as physical
activity, air and noise pollution, road safety, social capital and net-
works, and independent mobility, which determine the health out-
comes of children travelling to school. While this model covers
many of the critical concepts which we have touched on in the pre-
vious sections of this paper, there are omissions and interactions
that we would propose should be added to create a more holistic
model of school travel in the context of sustainability.
For the global level of intervention climate change is listed as an
example, however we would argue that global policies to reduce
energy use overall and to minimise reliance on carbon based fuel
sources should be added to this model providing a direct link into
the sustainability agenda. Policies aimed at reducing emission and
transport policies are listed as National level interventions. We
would argue that policies related to, for example, the licensing of
industries, and planning policies that determine the location of
schools and residential developments are in<U+FB02>uential in determin-
ing contextual and environmental conditions that determine the
possibility and ability of children to walk to school. The six levels
of in<U+FB02>uence as shown in Hosking et al.’s diagram do not show
the interdependence of these levels of in<U+FB02>uence. It is easy to see
how global, national, city-wide in<U+FB02>uences impact on school and
family level factors of transport choices. However, it can be argued
that there is some upward in<U+FB02>uence as well.
Hosking et al. argue that at each stage, from interventions to
health outcomes, the distribution of factors such as socio-economic
position or ethnicity can in<U+FB02>uence inequalities in the health out-
comes. Furthermore, some intervention effects are experienced
primarily by children travelling to and from school, such as the
bene<U+FB01>ts of more physical activity, whilst others such as reduced
traf<U+FB01>c volume provide bene<U+FB01>ts to the wider population by improv-
ing air quality and reducing risk of road traf<U+FB01>c accidents for all. A
good example of this interconnectedness of pro-sustainable and
health improving choices was reported by Giles-Corti et al. who
investigated the impact of neighbourhood walkability in the vicin-
ity of the school site and the potential to walk to school in Australia
(Giles-Corti et al., 2011). Children were more likely to regularly
walk to school if they attended a school in a highly walkable neigh-
bourhood (high street connectivity and low traf<U+FB01>c volume), but
less likely to walk if they attended a school with high connectivity
and but high traf<U+FB01>c volume, highlighting the importance of plan-
ning and street design in the vicinity of schools.

76                                             S. Hodgson et al. / Journal
The convergence of policy and research agendas or the co-ben-
e<U+FB01>ts from public health and sustainability science in the area of
school transport can be well illustrated for the <U+FB01>eld of childhood
obesity and physical activity. Policy measures that aim to increase
physical activity and reduce consumption of processed foods such
as walking to school and increasing the use of locally produced
foods also meet sustainability targets on energy and food miles.
The potential for joint polices and joint research is not yet widely
visible, and there is still much fragmentation in both arenas. An
aspirational policy example that is more holistic in its approach
is the 2008 Scottish strategy document ‘Good places, better health’,
outlining a new approach to environment and health in Scotland
(The Scottish Government, 2008), which puts great emphasis on
contextual and place in<U+FB02>uences on health and wellbeing, and aims
at generating convergence between previously disjointed levels of
intervention. It seeks to frame problems with reference to environ-
ment and place in a way that represents all the factors that bear
upon it.
In summary, while there exists great potential to derive co-ben-
e<U+FB01>ts for sustainability and health by in<U+FB02>uencing school travel,
more work is needed to bring together the growing evidence from
a range of disciplines to ensure these bene<U+FB01>ts can be realised and
maximised. Policy levers at a range of levels to reduce energy use
and emissions, in<U+FB02>uence planning decisions regarding the loca-
tions and accessibility of our schools, etc. can be used to create
an environment that will support decision making and behaviour
change as outlined above, but these policies, and the research to
support and evaluate their effects, need to be joined up.


4. Discussion

We started this paper from a premise of the many levels of links
between transport and health, using school travel as case study. In
doing so we have highlighted some of the evidence of the health
consequences associated with school transport, including the im-
pacts of motorised transport on air pollution and greenhouse gas
emissions, in contributing to our increasingly sedentary lifestyles,
and to road accidents, all of which have direct or indirect impacts
on health. We have also brie<U+FB02>y explored how ‘active’ transport is
associated with ‘co-bene<U+FB01>ts’ of reduced air pollution/greenhouse
gas emissions and increased exercise and better health. However,
our modern western lifestyles and behaviours are seemingly
reducing opportunities for these co-bene<U+FB01>ts to be realised, with
fewer trips, including school journeys, being made on foot. The is-
sues of travel and health are interwoven with issues of equity in a
complex way, be that social, economic or health-related equity.
Consequently, some groups are less able to access or pay for the
transport systems they need to acquire work, education and ser-
vices, all of which are necessary to maintaining health and wellbe-
ing. Transport choices can indeed exacerbate inequalities, or even
generate them, for instance increasing school choice can increase
traf<U+FB01>c <U+FB02>ows, with accompanying increases in air/noise pollution,
and higher risk of accidents, disproportionately affecting those sec-
tions of society less able to act upon these ‘choices’ being offered to
them. We have also illustrated how in<U+FB02>uencing travel behaviour to
encourage more healthful choices is a complex challenge, requiring
a deep understanding of decision making, habit, and self-regula-
tion, the impact of context and environments in shaping decisions,
as well as an appreciation of the stages during life when interven-
tions might be best enacted.
It seems that in the developed world we have created a situa-
tion for ourselves, exacerbated by urban design planning and pol-
icy, where, in order to lead a ‘ful<U+FB01>lled’ modern life encompassing a
career, childcare and schooling, we need to make constant journeys
between key locations, such as home, work and school, on a daily
of Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79
basis. Our ‘choice’ of transport mode is in<U+FB02>uenced not just by cost,
convenience and habit, but also by societal and cultural values at-
tached to these different travel modes. For many years now it
seems that cars have been viewed as more convenient, safe and
reliable than public transport or active transport, which, when cou-
pled with the increasing distances between home, school, and
work, is likely to explain much of the ongoing trend of an increase
in car journeys/decrease in active journeys noted above. While this
prevailing view shows no immediate sign of changing, there is per-
haps a growing recognition that there are numerous impacts asso-
ciated with our travel between these locations, including pollution,
climate change, congestion and road safety issues, as well as a di-
rect impact on those to whom these transporting responsibilities
fall, in terms of time, resource, money and stress. With ‘sustainabil-
ity’ now a widely recognised higher order goal, and with the devel-
opment of policy at a range of levels to achieve the true ends of
sustainability; namely autonomy, opportunity, security, and health
(McMichael et al., 2003), it might be expected that the balance will
shift back in favour of active or public forms of transport. Sustain-
ability is capable of bringing direct co-bene<U+FB01>ts to health (i.e. inter-
ventions to reduce carbon emissions from car-travel by increasing
active transport will also bring co-bene<U+FB01>ts of reduced obesity), but
may also be a powerful motivator for behavioural change, and
increasingly our infrastructures in society (including policy, laws,
etc.) that support people to change are (or should be) in accordance
with sustainable goals.
In writing this paper jointly with our backgrounds in the areas
of transport and exposure science, health psychology and behav-
iour change, and sustainability we aimed to more fully and better
understand the complexities of the links between transport and
health in the context of school travel. We have found this aim to
be more challenging than expected, and found it dif<U+FB01>cult to bring
our disciplinary based views together in a truly holistic way. None-
theless, we have gained various insights into the nature of some of
the challenges we face when trying to meaningfully tackle issues of
transport and health, and three of these are discussed in brief
below.
One insight made obvious to us as a consequence of participat-
ing in the UKTRC Workshop and working together on this paper
was that success in understanding transport and health issues will
only be forthcoming if we, as researchers, are able to move beyond
our separate disciplines, constrained as they are by subject speci<U+FB01>c
terminology and methods, restricted scope, and limited outcomes
or measures of success. The need to break this ‘silo’ thinking is
not limited to researchers; systems at an institutional and govern-
mental level prevent or at least complicate the adoption of the kind
of holistic approach that is needed to tackle these complex issues.
For example, recent government initiatives such as the Local Sus-
tainable Transport Fund (LSTF) focus unduly on achieving goals re-
lated to sustainability. Value could have been added to this same
initiative if co-bene<U+FB01>ts of sustainability, for example health bene-
<U+FB01>ts, were also brought to the fore, encouraging links between dif-
ferent disciplines, and enabling the wider bene<U+FB01>ts of adopting a
sustainable agenda to be appreciated.
A second insight, highlighted well by the Workshop’s specially
commissioned play, was identifying the various layers of assump-
tion we make about transport and transport behaviour, as individ-
uals, researchers, government and society. By working together to
appreciate the costs and bene<U+FB01>ts that might fall beyond our own
limited experiences or <U+FB01>elds of expertise we can start to unpack
these assumptions to make more balanced judgements about the
pros and cons associated with the transport choices we make
and/or values we assign to these travel modes.
A third insight was an appreciation of how quickly this <U+FB01>eld of
research is moving forwards, as evidenced by the numbers of re-
search publications being produced on this topic, as well as

S. Hodgson et al. / Journal of
Fig. 2. An integrated, interdisciplinary model of the links
government funds to support research to progress the <U+FB01>eld further.
While these indicators clearly signal a timely acceptance of the
importance of transport and health issues, a recurring theme from
the discussions at the Workshop was the continued failure of gov-
ernmental and institutional initiatives and/or interventions to con-
sult widely enough in the formative stages to maximise potential
bene<U+FB01>ts, and/or a failure to adequately assess their ef<U+FB01>cacy using
a range of outcome measures, from a range of disciplines, including
measures of health and wellbeing that are not easily captured by
standard metrics such as economic costs/bene<U+FB01>ts and/or life years
saved.
For this discussion we tried various approaches and frameworks
to draw the evidence and viewpoints together in a meaningful
manner. The models we have chosen to draw upon were those
familiar to our respective backgrounds and/or interesting models
and concepts we came across while researching this paper. First,
we adapted the Dahlgren and Whitehead ‘layers of in<U+FB02>uence’ social
model of health (Dahlgren and Whitehead, 1991) to show how age,
sex and constitutional factors, set within a context of individual
lifestyle factors; social and community networks; living, working
and schooling conditions; and broad socio-economic, cultural and
environmental conditions, can act as in<U+FB02>uences on the transport
choices we make (or have imposed upon us). This model has pre-
viously been adapted to create the ‘Settlement Health Map’, in an
attempt to provide a holistic model of the relationship between
people, their quality of life, and their local and global environment
(Grant and Braubach, 2010). Our version focussed speci<U+FB01>cally on
factors in<U+FB02>uencing or being in<U+FB02>uenced by school transport, and
while this approach encapsulated some of the myriad in<U+FB02>uences
on lives and lifestyles, acting at a range of levels, it did not allow
Transport Geography 21 (2012) 70–79                                         77
between transport and health in the context of school travel.
for pathways by which these factors act to be emphasised, nor
how these factors might determine health and wellbeing. In an at-
tempt to incorporate some of these key pathways we expanded the
model developed by Hosking et al., 2011, to demonstrate how
interventions, at the global, national, city, neighbourhood, school
and family levels, can in<U+FB02>uence school travel and health. While
these models combined went some way towards demonstrating
the numerous and complex in<U+FB02>uences of transport and health,
the model was not entirely satisfactory as there was insuf<U+FB01>cient
emphasis on the socio-economic, cultural, political and environ-
mental conditions in<U+FB02>uencing travel behaviours. To try to address
this limitation, we attempted to additionally incorporate the con-
cepts of integral theory and the key dimensions of human experi-
ence – subjective/interior versus objective/exterior, and individual
versus collective – as they relate to public health, based on the
work of Hanlon et al (Hanlon et al., 2010). In Hanlon’s paper the
importance of simultaneously considering all dimensions in the
model is stressed, ‘all key dimensions of human experience need to
be considered, harmonised and acted on as a whole’ otherwise public
health efforts (e.g. increasing active transport in line with sustain-
able goals) may be undermined by the in<U+FB02>uence of forces from the
lesser known dimensions.
The end result, a work in progress that is likely to evolve further,
is a layers-like model, with explicit interactions between the differ-
ent spheres of in<U+FB02>uence and an acknowledgement of the need for
integrative thinking (Fig. 2). We have set Dahlgren and Whitehead
‘layers of in<U+FB02>uence’ at the core, with individuals and families, their
resources, habits and behaviours being affected by local and regio-
nal school siting and transport policies, which in turn are in<U+FB02>u-
enced by local and regional planning, design and intervention,
