

Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627
www.elsevier.com/locate/geofo
Nuances of neighbourhood: Children’s perceptions of the space between
home and school in Auckland, New Zealand
Hannah Mitchell, Robin A. Kearns ¤, Damian C.A. Collins
School of Geography and Environmental Science, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand
Received 7 September 2005; received in revised form 31 October 2006
Abstract
This paper examines primary school children’s experiences of travelling between home and school within three neighbourhoods. Our
investigation is set in Auckland, New Zealand, where parental practices such as chauVeuring are commonplace, yet are increasingly recog-
nised as limiting children’s physical Wtness and environmental awareness. Drawing on children’s voices, writing and photographs, we
investigate how children currently travel to school, how they would like to travel, and how their perspectives on neighbourhood space
vary by age, socio-economic status and school location. Findings reveal that over half of the participants did not like the way they trav-
elled to school. Most desire to travel independently within public space, but are limited in their ability to do so, given the fears and obsta-
cles that prevail within their neighbourhoods. We contend that restricted use of public space diminishes children’s agency in inner
suburbs. Our analysis reveals that children favour ‘active travel’ for many of the same reasons as health professionals and transport plan-
ners. We conclude that as long as children are seen as innocents in need of protection, they will have limited agency in travel decisions and
highly contingent access to public space.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Children; Neighbourhoods; Mobility; Pedestrians; Photovoice; Auckland
1. Introduction                                                                (Green et al., 2000, pp. 123–124). Children, in other words,
appear to bring capacities for agency to urban life even if
The recent Xourishing of literature on children’s geo-                     parentally-imposed structures neutralise it through control
graphical experience has highlighted children’s competency                     and surveillance.
as social actors (Matthews and Limb, 1999; Fielding, 2000;                        Recent Australian and New Zealand studies have con-
Prout, 2002; Barker, 2003). This recognition of agency is                      sidered the experience of children in urban areas, focussing
signiWcant given that young people are among the most reg-                     especially on the journey to and from school, and associ-
ulated groups in western societies (Scott et al., 1998). More-                 ated safety concerns (Collins and Kearns, 2001a; Collins
over, the widespread adoption of chauVeuring behaviours                        and Kearns, 2005; Kearns et al., 2003; Tranter and Pawson,
by parents is leading to children being denied opportunities                   2001; Veitch et al., 2006). However, children’s voices have
to use and explore their neighbourhoods. This denial occurs                    only been partially represented in this work. This paper
notwithstanding the fact that “young people are constantly                     reports on research that employed child-centred methods
engaged in risk assessment, actively creating and deWning                      to investigate primary-school aged children’s attitudes
hierarchies premised upon diVerent discourses of risk as                       towards mobility in public space, and their experiences of
‘normal’ and acceptable or ‘dangerous’ and out of control”                     neighbourhood life, speciWcally in terms of the agency they
can exert within journeys from home to school. In accessing
children’s perspectives through a range of methods we
*
Corresponding author.                                                      contribute to an understanding of the emotional geogra-
E-mail address: r.kearns@auckland.ac.nz (R.A. Kearns).                     phies of home and neighbourhood within the context of the
0016-7185/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2006.11.012

rum









































H. Mitchell et al.
autocentric city (Davidson et al., 2005). We contend that
restricted use of public space has diminished children’s
capacity to act and assess the local environment, and that
this, in turn, potentially inhibits their personal and social
growth.
A rationale for our study is that while public space may
play an important role in children’s personal development,
physical exploration and social growth (Freeman et al.,
2004; Kearns and Collins, 2006; Loukaitou-Sideris, 2003),
there is a common perception that they are out of place in
public space, especially when unaccompanied by an adult
(Collins and Kearns, 2001b). Trends towards privatizing
and supervising many aspects of children’s lives run con-
trary to claims that children need the ability and freedom to
explore their neighbourhoods and to do things on their
own (Franklin, 2002; Holloway and Hubbard, 2001).
Building on these contentions, we address three empiri-
cal objectives. First, we seek to understand how children
currently travel to school in Auckland City. We focus on
this trip as it is typically direct, whereas after-school jour-
neys are often complicated by extra-curricular activities.
Second, we attempt to ascertain the ways in which children
desire to travel within their neighbourhoods, and identify
the constraints on realising these desires. The rationale for
this goal is that identifying constraints might provide a
platform for increasing children’s agency and opportunities
for experiencing local environments. Third, we seek to
investigate how children’s perspectives of their neighbour-
hoods vary by age, socio-economic status and school
location. The literature suggests that these variables are
signiWcant inXuences on children’s lives. For example, chil-
dren tend to be granted more independence as they grow
older (Hillman, 1993; Tranter and Pawson, 2001) and,
accordingly, their environmental experience increases with
age. At the same time, higher socio-economic status is gen-
erally associated with greater access to cars, and house-
holds having a greater propensity to drive children to
school, which reduces opportunities for children to explore
their neighbourhoods. School location may also inXuence
children’s experiences, with parents being more likely to
adopt chauVeuring behaviours when schools are sited near
busy roads (Tranter and Pawson, 2001).
This study builds on other work in children’s geogra-
phies (e.g., Valentine, 2004) in its attempt to understand
lived experience as a means of enhancing our picture of
children’s views of public space. We conceptualise the jour-
ney from home to school as reXecting wider societal atti-
tudes towards children, particularly those which seek, to
greater or lesser extents, to provide protection or promote
freedom. We assume that if children are not travelling to
school free of adult supervision, it is unlikely that they will
be travelling elsewhere in public space independently.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
First, we review the literature on children’s experiences of
urban neighbourhoods, and the ways in which these experi-
ences are structured by adult fears and decision-making.
We then outline the contexts for our research, describing
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627                                        615
both Auckland City and the three neighbourhoods in
which the study was based. The third section identiWes the
three main data collection methods used, the order in which
they were employed, and the nature of the classrooms
included in the study. In the following results section we
focus on children’s transport preferences and their perspec-
tives of danger at the neighbourhood level. Finally, we reX-
ect on our attempt to see the world through children’s eyes
and the implications of adopting this perspective.

2. Children’s experience of local urban environments

Walking between home and school enables children to
learn about the environment. Playing or hanging out with
friends may therefore be activities that are unremarkable
in adult eyes, but they are part of the experience of child-
hood (Cunningham et al., 1996). As Hardin (2000) argues,
the immediate neighbourhood potentially serves as an
important ‘local’ space that sits midway between the imag-
ined safety of home and the perceived dangers of public
space. This said, the ‘local sphere’ (or neighbourhood) is
arguably being reconstructed as a landscape of risk
through such factors as fear of strangers and increases in
vehicular traYc. Being driven or constantly accompanied
by an adult in public space may prevent the simplest of
outdoor activities from promoting individuality, and com-
promise the development of autonomy. Children acting
autonomously in public space arguably build skills and
attitudes which may continue into adulthood (e.g., social
competency in public places; desires for active and sustain-
able travel) (Collins and Kearns, 2001a; Tranter and Paw-
son, 2001).
The presence of children in public space may also have
wider societal beneWts, contributing to a sense of commu-
nity, feelings of trust, and mutual support (Franklin, 2002).
Tranter and Pawson (2001) assert that communities can be
enhanced through encouraging the use of public space by
children, as their presence often helps to break down barri-
ers between adults, and makes the streets more interesting,
liveable and communal. However, such claims potentially
underestimate the strength of the proverbial exhortation
‘don’t talk to strangers’, which strongly discourages chil-
dren from interacting with – or even acknowledging –
unknown adults in the public domain. In addition, children
need opportunities in which to meet and socialise with each
other, separate from places controlled by teachers and par-
ents (Simpson, 1997).
Arguably the Wrst barrier that children encounter in
exploring their neighbourhoods stems not from issues of
design, or potential risks, but rather from the prevalent
social construction of children as dependent, vulnerable and
in need of constant adult guidance and supervision. This is
the underlying basis for limiting children’s spatial freedoms,
and their exclusion from decision-making and planning
processes (Hill et al., 2004). Adult(ist) decision-making
creates barriers to children’s mobility and can lead to chil-
dren feeling out of place in their ‘own’ neighbourhoods

616                                          H. Mitchell et al.
(Christensen and O’Brien, 2003). Parental restrictions on
children’s activities – in the name of safety, convenience
and/or local expectations – are one dimension of this dis-
placement, as Dowling (2000) found in her study of mother-
ing and car use in Sydney, Australia. Moreover, the time and
space available for children to explore on their own or inter-
act with others appears to be progressively shrinking in
developed nations (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2003). Thus chil-
dren’s geographies are dually limited, in terms of both access
to space and access to people: children rarely meet each
other outside of school and family relationships. The chil-
dren’s geographies literature has shown that these limita-
tions potentially keep younger children shut oV from the
wider world, and from opportunities to socialise and experi-
ence a variety of ideas, spaces and people (e.g., Valentine,
1996a; Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002).
The growth and intensiWcation of urban areas, together
with increased car usage, have coincided with child pedes-
trian accidents becoming a leading cause of injuries and
fatalities in New Zealand (Collins and Kearns, 2001a,
2005). As individual parents can do very little to improve
the hostile traYc environment for the beneWt of all children,
many respond by seeking to protect their children from per-
ceived dangers. A similar approach prevails in schools: in
New Zealand, for example, police oYcers are brought into
primary schools to teach children how ‘to cross the road
safely’ – in other words, to deal with the adult world of
traYc. This process does not address the problem of adult
drivers being given priority over children. Health educators
“ƒ want to teach children to be careful and to be scared,
rather than look into limiting the traYc” (Davis and Jones,
1996, p. 109), ignoring the fact that these education mea-
sures have proven to be less eVective than anticipated (Rob-
erts et al., 2002).
Returning to our earlier theme of agency, the location
and spatial extent of adult responsibility for children is a
recurring theme in public policy and debate. Children are
given responsibilities in some areas of their lives, such as
chores around the home, and these duties promote power
and responsibility (Such and Walker, 2004). However
when it comes to being accountable for their own lives
there is often a retraction of responsibility as children con-
tinue to be viewed by parents and caregivers as ‘vulnerable
innocents’ (Valentine, 1996b). In prevalent Western adult
understandings, children are almost invariably seen as
being unable to make (sensible) decisions for themselves,
and as vulnerable to dangers in unsupervised environ-
ments.
By way of example, Loukaitou-Sideris’ (2003) study of
four urban sites in southern California found that only 16%
of seven year olds were allowed to go further than a block
without an adult, and 30% of 11–12 year olds had not vis-
ited a public space on their own. Further, Cunningham and
Jones (1999) discovered that only 6% of Australian children
played outside within their own neighbourhoods. As the
built environment continues to become more intimidating,
children are becoming more marginalised, with diminished
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627
access to safe places to journey within and explore, due in
large part to parental restraints. This trend has been
observed in a range of studies in Australia (Dowling, 2000),
New Zealand (Collins and Kearns, 2001a; Tranter and
Pawson, 2001) and the UK (Valentine and McKendrick,
1997; Valentine, 1997a,b; Hillman et al., 1990), demonstrat-
ing that children’s independence is being fundamentally
compromised to create the appearance of good parenting.
Tranter and Pawson’s (2001) study of four schools in
Christchurch, New Zealand, noted that this social pressure
was strongest in the school neighbourhood with the highest
socio-economic status, where a particularly protective par-
enting culture had developed.
One reported result of this trend is that children develop
an ‘island geography’ comprising locations that they are
chauVeured to and from, eVectively preventing Wrst-hand
experience of what Hardin (2000) called the ‘local sphere’ in
between such destinations. As Tranter and Pawson (2001)
claim, while children may be seeing more, as passive passen-
gers they are learning less. Parents, realising they have
placed spatial restrictions on their children, often respond
with additional extra-curricular activities, and by accompa-
nying their children to speciWc recreational destinations
such as parks. Travel to these destinations is typically by
car.
Secondly, chauVeuring limits children’s opportunities to
learn how to function safely in the urban environment
(Timperio et al., 2004). Children often realise that there is a
world they are being deprived of, and articulate desires for
opportunities to explore and learn more about it (Tranter
and Pawson, 2001). This said, O’Brien et al. (2000) discov-
ered that a highly protected life does not necessarily lead to
impoverished peer relations or unhappiness. Indeed, some
children can be content with this lifestyle. However, the
very act of chauVeuring does lead to a restriction on chil-
dren’s experiential geographies (Valentine, 1996b). Passive
transporting (rather than active mobility) may also impact
upon adult life, as the ‘chauVeured child’ potentially
becomes another car dependent adult.
At least partially as a response to adult fear, children are
also being increasingly placed in adult-supervised after-
school activities, contributing to lives of near-constant sur-
veillance (Smith and Barker, 2000, 2001). O’Brien et al.
(2000) link a new culture of indoor play to the embedded
cultural orientation of the family: speciWcally, the interiori-
sation of children’s leisure is connected to a pervasive pri-
vatism. A recent Auckland study revealed parents in one
suburb to be reluctant to have neighbourhood children into
their home for fear of theft or disruptive behaviour (Witten
et al., 2003). In summary, the lack of parentally acceptable
unsupervised play spaces, a fear of strangers and traYc
dangers, and the unwillingness of parents to encourage
their children to play outdoors have, in combination, cre-
ated a generation of children who are largely unfamiliar
with their local neighbourhood and dependent upon the car
– something that is readily apparent within our study site,
Auckland City.

H. Mitchell et al. / Geo
3. Research setting

Auckland City (population 405,000) is one of the four
constituent cities within the Auckland metropolitan region
(population 1.3 million – 2006 est.). Between 1991 and 2006
the City’s population grew by 32.2%. Auckland’s growth
has prompted a ‘suburban squeeze,’ with widespread inWll
housing and increasing residential densities catering to the
increased population. These trends have contributed to a
loss of outdoor play spaces for children (Kearns and Col-
lins, 2006). The traditional ‘quarter-acre’ suburban prop-
erty, for example, is rapidly becoming an historical artefact.
Auckland City has a related reputation for traYc con-
gestion, which causes considerable political debate and
demands for government action. On an average weekday,
nearly 50% of morning peak journeys are work-related and
another 40% are attributed to schools or other educational
institutions (Auckland City Council, 2004). Walking has
long been poorly regarded by planners and municipal poli-
ticians in Auckland (Bean, 2006). This view has become
inscribed in Auckland’s infrastructure with, for example,
variable upkeep of older sidewalks and a lack of safe places
to cross many busy roads. This situation is slowly being
addressed with a new local government focus on promoting
walking and cycling, although traYc remains, from the per-
spective of many parents in particular, an extreme hazard
for children. As a result, many parents rely on private
motor vehicles for transporting children. This situation sug-
gests sedentary lifestyles and lost opportunities for children
to explore their local neighbourhoods.
To pursue our empirical objectives, three Auckland pri-
mary (elementary) schools were selected as study sites, and
work was undertaken by the Wrst author with children in
two classes at each school. In the hope of gaining a broad-
based understanding of children’s experiences of neigh-
bourhood, we Wrst determined that the selected schools
should represent a range of positions on the socio-eco-
nomic scale (in terms of the New Zealand school system,
this meant schools from deciles 1, 5 and 10).1 Letters outlin-
ing the study were sent to the principals of Wve randomly-
selected schools from each of the chosen deciles, giving
them the option to agree to or decline the opportunity for
involvement in the research. The initial response rate was
low, and only two acceptances were received. Non-respond-
ing schools were then contacted by phone, and personal
contacts were used to assist recruitment. Ultimately, a will-
ing school at each level was identiWed.
The participating primary schools were Maungawhau
Primary School (decile 10), Mount Roskill Primary School


1
All New Zealand state-funded schools are ranked according to the
socio-economic characteristics of the areas their pupils live in. Decile 1
schools are the 10% of schools with the highest proportion of pupils drawn

from areas of low socio-economic status, while decile 10 schools are the
10% of schools with the fewest such pupils. A proportion of government

funding is linked to this classiWcation system, with Decile 1 schools receiv-
ing the most assistance, and Decile 10 schools the least.
forum 38 (2007) 614–627                                         617
(decile 5), and Waterview Primary School (decile 1). Maun-
gawhau Primary is set in Balmoral/Mt. Eden, a central-west
neighbourhood of Auckland. It takes its name from a
nearby volcanic cone, the highest on the Auckland isthmus.
The neighbourhood has undergone extensive gentriWcation
since the 1980s. Subsequently, the area has an established
reputation as a desirable location for families to purchase
residential property and ensure access to what is regarded
as a high quality public (state) school. Although bounded
by two busy arterial roads, the streets within this suburb are
relatively quiet; all have footpaths, and many have traYc-
calming measures. There are also a number of parks and
diverse retail sites within the area. Students are primarily of
New Zealand European (‘Pakeha’) background.
Mt. Roskill Primary is located in the suburb of the same
name, also taken from a distinctive volcanic cone, and is in
a high-traYc area with Wve major arterial routes nearby. In
the 1950s and 1960s the suburb of Mt. Roskill epitomised
the New Zealand ‘quarter-acre’ dream (see Ferguson,
1994), with ample lot size, and appealing streets and foot-
paths. Located approximately 10 km from downtown
Auckland, it is now one of the most ethnically diverse areas
in the region, and home to many international students,
migrants, and refugees (Lawrence and Kearns, 2005).
Roads in the immediate vicinity of the school are acutely
congested, and widely regarded as dangerous for children.
Waterview Primary School is set within a residential
area characterised by public housing, close to the North-
Western Motorway. However, aside from one major arte-
rial road running through part of Waterview, local streets
are relatively quiet. It is a poorer area, reXected in a number
of boarded-up shops. Waterview Primary is the smallest of
the schools included in the study, and most of its pupils are
of Polynesian descent.

4. Research process and methods

Once permission to carry out the research at their
schools was gained, principals were asked to nominate two
participating classes, one junior (pupils aged 6–7 years) and
one senior (pupils aged 10–11 years), and to gain the con-
sent of relevant teachers. Each class had a minimum of 15
children participating in each research activity. Data collec-
tion activities were carried out both within the classrooms
and within small discussion groups of Wve to eight children.
The teachers of the nominated classes were asked to invite
children to participate in the discussion group. In accor-
dance with ethical requirements, information sheets about
the study were then sent to the parents and children ver-
bally agreed to participate.
We deemed story-writing activities to be a useful way to

collect both narrative and enumerative data from the class-
room. Creative writing is a central component of children’s

learning in New Zealand primary schools and we sought to


capitalise on children’s familiarity with this concept. Two
writing activities were conducted in each participating class
over consecutive weeks. The Wrst author was present during

618                                          H. Mitchell et al.
all activities, introducing the topics to the children and
prompting them with questions to further understanding of
the topic.
Topic One, entitled “My journey to school”, was aimed
at addressing the Wrst study objective by gathering data
about the modes of transport used by children and who, if
anyone, they travelled with. It included the question, “What
do you see along the way?” which was intended to assess
whether children’s understandings and experiences of
neighbourhood varied according to their mode of travel (cf.
Tranter and Pawson, 2001). Topic Two addressed the sec-
ond research objective and asked children to complete a
sentence about the way they would like to come to school,
explain their reasons, and comment on if they were unable
to meet this aspiration. The children were asked to keep
their transport preferences to realistic ways of travelling
(discouraging the proposed use of magic carpets, Xying
horses, etc.). Both topics also yielded information relating
to our third objective, as they were conducted in two diVer-
ent classes at each of the three selected schools, which were
separated by signiWcant spatial and socio-economic dis-
tances.
These writing activities constituted an initial method
employed to generate a broad picture of the range of chil-
dren’s views. A deeper understanding was subsequently
sought via discussion groups. As in focus groups (Cameron,
2005), while there were general topics to be discussed, the
children guided the conversation themselves and set their
own agenda, with only occasional prompts and requests for
elaboration from the researcher. Each of the discussion
group sessions ended in general dialogues about partici-
pants’ neighbourhoods, their perceived dangers and any
aspects they would like to change. Sessions were audio-
taped, with consent, and then transcribed.
We addressed the aim of gaining insight into what chil-
dren perceived to be dangerous for people their age
through use of photovoice (Wang et al., 1998), an action-
research methodology which is underpinned by the idea
that people are ‘experts’ on their own lives and therefore
should be empowered to play a prominent role in research
about them. Photovoice typically involves providing mar-
ginalised individuals with a camera “ƒ so they can record
and represent their everyday realities” (Wang et al., 2004, p.
75). As the approach intentionally attempts to empower
participants with little money, power or status, young peo-
ple can potentially beneWt from engaging with photovoice
(e.g., Aitken and Wingate, 1993; Kroeger et al., 2004;

McAllister et al., 2005; Strack et al., 2004). The photovoice

activity occurred in the Wrst week of contact with each

school and involved walking with children around their
immediate neighbourhood and asking them to record
whatever they perceived as dangerous using disposable
cameras.
The cameras were shared between the participating chil-

dren (juniors: three cameras per six children; seniors: two
cameras per six children), and each took turns at taking

photos. The researcher and participants were accompanied
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627
by a teacher’s assistant in order to meet ethical require-
ments, as well as to ensure the peace of mind of any poten-
tially concerned parents. Both adults avoided input into
decisions as to what to photograph. One week later, the
participating children were invited to gather around the
photos and discuss the dangers they saw in them. These dis-
cussions ended in general conversation about the children’s
neighbourhood, its dangers, and the aspects they wished to
change.
With the approval of the school administrators and
teachers of the classes, the writing, which was completed at
each of the case study schools, was collated and photocop-
ied. The numbers of children varied slightly between classes
and activities, with 131 children participating in writing
activity one and 136 in writing activity two. There was an
even representation of junior and senior contributors. Gen-
der and ethnicity were not recorded, as this study’s focus
was on the ways in which travel and use of public space var-
ied according to the children’s age, and the socio-economic
status and location of their school.

5. Children’s experiences of home–school travel

Of the 131 children participating in the Wrst activity
(which involved writing about the predominant way in
which they travelled to school), 55.7% made the journey
accompanied by an adult, either by private car (39.7% of all
participants), walking (14.5%), or some other means (1.5%).
A total of 44.3% of children travelled independently or with
peers (14.5% and 29.8%, respectively) (Table 1).
While the majority of the study participants reported
being accompanied en route to school, almost 45% trav-
elled by themselves or in the company of other children
only. Many Auckland children, then, appear to enjoy a
measure of independence and autonomy. This trend was
not uniform across diVerent age groups, but nor was it as
diVerent as one might expect given the diVerences in matu-
rity levels involved: 40% of juniors travelled unaccompa-
nied by an adult, compared to 48.5% of seniors. Adult
accompaniment of pupils was particularly marked at
Maungawhau Primary (in the most aZuent neighbour-
hood), where 75% of juniors and 55% of seniors travelled to
school with an adult. The lowest accompaniment rate was
at Mt. Roskill, where 50% of both juniors and seniors trav-
elled with adults.


Table 1

Participants’ modes of travel and accompaniment (all schools)

Mode of travel   Mode of accompaniment

Parent    Family (parent  Peers   Independent Total
and sibling)
Walk              8        11              39      17           75
Cycle             1          0              0        2           3
Bus               1          0              0        0           1
Car              25        27               0        0          52

Total            35        38              39      19          131


H. Mitchell
In conversation, children who did not walk were well
aware that they were missing out on learning opportunities.
Consistent with trends observed in Norway (Sjolie and
Thuen, 2002), Britain (Hillman et al., 1990), and elsewhere
in New Zealand (Tranter and Pawson, 2001), the boredom
of being chauVeured was a common theme in the children’s
writing.
“I do not like coming to school the way I do, because
you can’t do anything. You see the same things every
time” (MJ – Car)2

“I don’t like travelling to school in a vehicle because
it’s boring inside a car” (RS – Car)

By contrast, children who walked to school, either individu-

ally, or with peers or parents, were particularly positive

about this journey. While some complained of getting tired,

respondents at all three schools valued the social nature of

walking. Thus, one student commented “I really like the

way I get to school, because I don’t get lonely and me and my

friend can talk to each other” (MS). Socialising with their

peers is a primary need and desire of children (Baraldi,

2003; Driskell, 2002); walking to school helps this to be

achieved (see also Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).

Exercise and exploring the environment were also per-

ceived advantages of walking:

“When you’re walking, you don’t need to hop in the
car ƒ you get to play hide and seek and chase and
you get energy and Wt” (MJ – walks with peers)

“I like walking to school because it’s fun and the sun
shines bright. I don’t get bored” (MJ – walks unac-

companied)

“It gives you energy and is good for your bones” (WS

– walks with parent)

These type of comments were commonly oVered and reXect
an internalisation of health promotion rhetoric which has
emphasised that children need regular exercise to keep
healthy. It appears that curiosity keeps children interested
in walking between home and school, despite the ‘sameness’
that might be identiWed by some adults. Children invent
and play games during their walk home and investigate
interesting sites along the way.
Through their writing, some children gave examples of
exercising, and negotiating agency. These participants
appeared to be challenging, at least implicitly, the struc-
tures constraining their everyday lives, by making their
own decisions about travelling to school – and opting for
walking because of the independence and experiences it
brings.


2
Narratives are attributed as follows: M, R or W as a preWx

Maungawhau, Mt. Roskill or Waterview schools, and the suYxes J
represent junior and senior students, respectively.
et al. / Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627                                        619
“I tell my mother to let me go in the car today and
tomorrow I can go by walking and the next morning I
said “let’s go by walking” (RJ – Walks with parent).

“She [mum] asked me if I wanted to go by car but I
said ‘no’ so I walked to school.” (WS – Walks unac-
companied)
As well as highlighting desires to walk to school, these com-
ments also contribute to the idea of children and parents
negotiating ‘licences’, which specify the nature and extent
of children’s spatial freedoms (Hillman et al., 1990; Tranter
and Pawson, 2001; Valentine, 1997c, 2000).
Of the three case study schools, Mt. Roskill students
demonstrated the highest levels of independent walking to

school (i.e., without an adult): 65% were accompanied at

Maungawhau, 53% at Waterview, and 50% at Mt. Roskill.

This Wnding was surprising, given that Mt. Roskill Primary

is located in the most heavily traYcked area. However, fur-

ther investigation revealed that, compared to the other

schools, a larger proportion of children from Mt. Roskill

Primary were travelling in the company of other young

people – not only children of their own age, but also sib-

lings attending the adjacent intermediate (junior high) and

high schools. While a campus with more than one school

can be perceived as negative (e.g., due to the concentration

of vehicular traYc), beneWts can be seen with younger chil-
dren being given greater opportunities for active travel.
Maungawhau and Waterview Primary pupils do not have
the same opportunity to be accompanied by signiWcantly
older siblings on the journey to school.


5.1. Children’s transport preferences

Of the 136 children participating in the second writing

activity (how they would like to travel) 20 expressed a

desire for unrealistic means (despite exhortations to avoid
such alternatives). These responses were therefore left out
of the analysis. The remaining results are recorded in Table
2. Of the 53.4% of children currently walking to school,
half (i.e., 25.9% of the total) were content with their mode
of transport. Respondents reported that they enjoyed
walking to school because of the social interaction, per-
ceived health beneWts and the pure ‘fun’ of it. According to
one, “it’s nice to walk with my brother because we can talk
about stuV” (MS). A desire to avoid the traYc jams and the
boredom of being trapped in a car were additional reasons
quoted by Mt. Roskill senior children. Seeing the traYc
chaos outside their school every morning and having the
ability to walk faster than the travelling cars appeared to
give these children Wrst hand experience of the disadvan-
tages of private transport and beneWts of walking (cf.
Kearns et al., 2003).
While few children reported cycling to school, all of

represent
those who were cyclists wished to persist with this form of
and S            transport. They stated that cycling was fun and faster than
walking, and less boring than private transport. One child

620                                                  H. Mitchell et al.
Table 2
Current practice vs. desired modes of transport to school
Current practice               Desire
Walk               Cycle/roller skate
Walk                           25.9%              12.1%
Cycle/roller skate              0                  2.6%
Public transport                0                  0
Private automobile             14.7%               5.2%
‘Desire’ total                 40.6%              19.9%
added that it was “friendly to the environment” (RS) recogn-
ising that cycling is a zero emission form of transportation.
Over half (53.4%) of children who wrote about their
travel preferences stated a wish to change their current

mode of transport. We now explore the explanations

oVered by these children. Of those currently being driven,
almost half (45%) expressed a desire for a more active

travel mode (i.e., walking or cycling/roller skating), and an

additional 13% favoured public transport, which typically
oVers some opportunity for exercise in the form of walking

to and from stops. Several themes emerged to explain this

desire to step out of the car and into public space, the Wrst

being an enthusiasm for exploring the local environment.
As Valentine and McKendrick’s (1997) research in north-
west England found, many children have a strong urge to
explore their surroundings and experience things Wrst hand,
rather than through the passive interactions that private
transport oVers:

“I would really like to walk the whole way, even if it
was raining. Nature is beautiful and I love to look at
it ƒ overall I love walking, it’s fun and special in it’s
own wonderful way” (MS – practice: car, desire:
walk)

“I can feel the breeze on my face ƒ see beautiful Xow-
ers, dogs and cats, but I can only do that if I ride my
bike” (MS – practice: car, desire: cycle)

“I want to see stuV” (RS – practice: car, desire: walk)

By expressing that she wants to walk, even in the rain, the
quoted Maungawhau senior displays a deep desire to
change the way she travels to school. She wants to enjoy
walking, an act which for many adults in ‘autocentric’
Auckland is highly marginal, seldom engaged in as a form
of everyday mobility (Bean, 2006). Another child stated,
with frustration “you don’t get to see much in a car” (MS).
Despite the simplicity of their words, these children realise
that they are missing out on exploring opportunities by
being transported in private vehicles. However unremark-

able, activities such as picking up leaves and pinecones and

merely “seeing stuV”, are all actions which work towards
giving children an understanding about their environment

and, ultimately, a sense of place (Cunningham et al., 1996).

Social interaction was a second common theme to

emerge in children’s writing. A desire to interact with
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627



Public transport         Private automobile        ‘Practice’ total
3.4%                     12%                       53.4%
0                         0                         2.6%
0                         0                         0
6%                       18.1%                     44%
9.4%                     30.1%                     100%
friends and others on the street was mentioned as a primary
reason why they wanted to change from their current mode
of transport:

“I would be able to say hello to people and get to

know people” (MJ – practice: car, desire: walk)


“I would rather bike because then I can talk to my

friends” (MS – practice: car, desire: cycling)


“You get a good view from the bus and your friends

might be there” (RS – practice: car, desire: public

transport)

While some children imagined themselves travelling with a
small group of friends, others dreamed on a grander scale,
envisioning all children catching the same mode of public
transport to school:

“I would like to come to school by going in a bus with
all my friends because I like talking and laughing with
my friends” (WS – practice: car, desire: public trans-
port)

“It would be cool if there was a tram that went from
Mt. Eden to a meeting point. And every kid would
walk or run to the meeting point and the tram would
take them to school” (MS – practice: car, desire: pub-
lic transport)
SigniWcantly, these comments show children’s willingness

to travel by public transport. It is plausible that their per-
ceptions stem from partaking in school trips, during which
a whole class travels together on one bus, making it an
enjoyable, if noisy, trip for all. Any notion that public
transport is anti-social (whereby passengers sit silently side
by side) is clearly not evident to children.
A third theme children articulated was a desire to use a
more active form of transport as a means to stay healthy,
both physically and mentally, and increase their Wtness
levels.

“I would like to get energy, get healthy and brainy”

(WJ – practice: car, desire: walk)


“I want to walk because it’s fun and when you come

to school you have a good mind” (RS – practice: car,

desire: walk)


H. Mitchell et al.
“I could get more fresh air than from being stuVed in
a car” (MS – practice: car, desire: cycle)

Children are aware that exercise is necessary for a well-bal-

anced life. They have likely picked this concept up from a
number of sources: their parents, the news media, and
school. Children not only absorb health-promoting mes-
sages, but also want to take steps to enact them, realising
the beneWts which can be gained (Kearns et al., 2003). The
cognitive beneWts perceived by two of the pupils quoted
above may relate to the popular idea (in New Zealand)
that, in walking to school, children arrive more alert than
would be the case if they had been driven, thus making
walking good for mental as well as physical health (see
Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).
The theme of the ‘need for speed’ also featured through-
out this part of research, with children frequently express-
ing a preference for transport that would be faster than
driving in a congested city:

“You can dodge traYc” (RS – practice: car, desire:

cycle)


“I’ve always been in a car since I was little, so I would

like to cycle, it would be faster” (WS – practice: car,

desire: cycle)

It seems that children desire to investigate their environ-
ment both deeply (e.g., looking at plants, experiencing the
elements, on their journey) and broadly (e.g., seeing and
covering as much space as they can). In summary, writing
activity two showed that 60.5% of the surveyed children
expressed a desire to use an active mode of transport, and
an additional 9.4% favoured public transport. The number
of children who, at the time of the research, walked or
cycled/roller skated is slightly lower (59.5% in writing activ-
ity one; 56.0% in writing activity two), while almost no chil-
dren presently use public transport for their journey to
school.

5.2. Children’s perceptions of barriers and dangers

As many children express a desire to utilise active modes
of transport on their journey to school, but are unable to
act upon it, the question remains: what is stopping them
from travelling as they would like? The children who
answered this question oVered one unmistakable theme:
“I’m not allowed”. While parentally-imposed barriers to
children’s active travel may be motivated by a wide range
of factors, they are most often explained to children in

terms of safety concerns. This was particularly marked for

children attending Mt. Roskill Primary, which – as noted

above – is located in a highly congested area:

“I can’t because I’m not allowed to be by myself” (RJ
– practice: car, desire: walk).


“Mum doesn’t let us near dangerous things” (RS –

practice: car, desire: walk).
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627                                         621
“My mum says it’s too dangerous when it’s not. She
worries too much about me. I am 11 years old, old
enough to look after myself” (RS – practice: walk,

desire: cycle).

The case study children were all too aware how their par-
ents felt about them using public space, with most being
speciWc about their parents’ fears vis-à-vis both traYc and
stranger dangers. While children desire to use other modes
of transport, restrictions from parents frequently prevent
this. Consequently, congestion around the school gate and
traYc on the roads continue to increase as parents chau-
Veur their children. The other common issue constraining
children’s ability to utilise active transport was the simple
fact that they lived too far away from school to utilise their
‘preferred’ transport options, given limitations of time and
stamina.
In addition to eliciting comments regarding the journey
between home and school, we also considered children’s
perspectives on neighbourhood dangers more generally,

particularly via the Wnal research activity – a researcher-led

walk around a block considered representative of each
school’s neighbourhood. During this activity children were

asked to photograph whatever they thought was ‘danger-

ous’ to children of primary school age. The most pertinent

discovery was the existence of clear diVerences between the
schools: children attending Waterview Primary were most
concerned about strangers and being alone in a public
space; Mt. Roskill Primary pupils highlighted roads and
traYc; and Maungawhau Primary children were troubled
by lower-order issues that might be dismissed as trivial.
Overall, frustration with traYc and road dangers was the
most frequently recorded complaint (see Table 3). Over half
of the photos featured road traYc related phenomena,
which were also preoccupations of the children in the writ-
ing and discussion activities. TraYc-related fears and com-
plaints were widespread, but featured most with the Mt.
Roskill juniors. This observation conWrms the view that
children perceive traYc to be the greatest threat to children
of their age, aligning with parental fears and academic
research (Collins and Kearns, 2005; Baraldi, 2003; Chris-
tensen and O’Brien, 2003; Tranter and Pawson, 2001; Val-
entine, 2001). One picture taken by a Mt. Roskill junior is
signiWcant for its illustration of just how threatening a car is
to a child of primary school age, who cannot see over the
roof or through the windows (see Fig. 1).
When the young photographer was asked what it repre-
sented to her, she answered

“Cars can run over the kids when they come out of

school. There’s parked cars as well, so you can barely

see. I took the photo because you have to stick your

head behind the cars to see the road and they could
hit you” (RJ).

Mt. Roskill seniors also commented on the intense conges-
tion around their school, such as in this dialogue during a

discussion group:


622                                                 H. Mitchell et
Table 3
Perceived dangers recorded with ‘photo-voice’
Dangers                             Class
MJ MS RJ RS WJ WS Total
Roads/traYc Cars/trucks             5     9    13   3      8   8
related     Road/drives           2     1    19   3    12    8

Cracked pavement      2     4     4   4      1   0
Drains                2     1     0   0      1   0
Holes                 1     0     0   0      0   0
Construction/repair   5     3     0   0      0   0


Litter        Broken glass          2     1     5   4      4   4
Rubbish bins          4     1     0   0      0   0

Other rubbish        1      4     4   7      1   6
Dog waste             0     1     0   0      2   0
GraYti                0     0     0   1      0   2

Private       Fences               1      6     4   2      0   0
Property    Toys                  1     0     4   3      0   0
Stairs                1     0     0   0      0   0
Shops                 0     0     0   0      2   3


Other         Power box/pipes       3     5    10   9      3   5
Power lines          2      2     8   0      0   0
Public Reserves       0     0     0   0      2   4
Rocks                 1     0     4   1      0   0
Trees                 0     0     1   1      1   0




RS Boy 1: Too many adults come to school and

work by car causing too much pollution and traYc

jams.


RS Boy 2: There’s too much traYc on [the] road so

children are late to school.

Fig. 1. Height of a car from a
al. / Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627
RS Girl 1: There are too many cars and not enough
pedestrian crossings.

RS Girl 2: Yeah, and the traYc is just zooming ƒ
46            without slowing down or stopping.
45
Speeding cars were also discussed by the children. There
15
4       was particular concern that the drivers, especially near the
1       school, were not cautious enough about looking out for
7       children and obeying the road rules.
124
“Cars are always driving past (the school gate), espe-
20
5
cially before school and after school and it’s really
23            dangerous for kids” (RJ).
3
3           “Speeding cars run over children and if you don’t rea-
54            lise that a car is coming and try to cross over you
13            could get squished, and if you don’t die you would be
0           in a lot of pain” (MS)
1
5
18            “The cars are going way too fast and they don’t stop
at the lights” (WS)
35
12        All the participants were aware that, because drivers are
6       not as careful as they should be, children need to take
6
3
responsibility for themselves. This internalisation of
62        responsibility may be interpreted as reXecting a degree of
competence among children in terms of independently
negotiating the dangers of public space, but perhaps also

points to the possibility of children blaming themselves in

the event of an accident (see Roberts et al., 1997, 2002). An

example of self-blame was seen in a conversation during the
Maungawhau Primary senior discussion group, when a

child spoke of a waste truck that was observed (and photo-

graphed) reversing around a corner near their school dur-
six year old’s eye – picture by Mt. Roskill Junior.

H. Mitchell et al.
ing their neighbourhood walk. The children recognised the
waste truck as a hazard that children have to encounter and
cope with, and added that if an accident happened, the
child was most likely to blame.
While the streets were viewed as hazardous, children

viewed their school as a safe zone. School was generally

cast as a place of refuge where they were away from the

dangers and hostilities of the outside world, thus suggest-

ing its centrality (along with, for most, home) to their emo-

tional geographies of neighbourhood (see Davidson et al.,

2005). This was highlighted through written comments

such as “we safely cross the road and head to school. We are

safely in the school grounds” (RS). This view of the school

as a ‘safe haven’ aligns with one of the original intentions

for schooling, which was to keep children from being

exposed to the ‘evils’ of the world (Eekelaar, 1986; Pren-

tice, 1977). This interpretation of public space as a negative

inXuence in children’s lives has continued, manifesting in

the minds of children as well as adults. When children were

asked “what is school like compared to outside?” they

responded unanimously that “it’s safer”. Another girl

commented “sometimes I get scared walking to school

because I walk with my little brother who is 7 years old. I

feel scared because someone might kidnap my precious

brother” (RS).

In some children fear of public space was not the pri-

mary concern, but rather a lack of opportunities to use it.

Others expressed frustration about the diYculties and

ambiguities of public space. Children, especially from the

high socio-economic status Maungawhau Primary, wanted

the opportunity to use public space but felt they could not.

The root of this problem was the lack of urban spaces tai-

lored to children’s recreational needs:

“When you’re riding your bike the law says that you
have to ride your bike on the road, but parents would
never let you do that. But the footpath is just as bad,
cars are on the road and on the footpaths, because
they are backing out of their driveways” (MS).

“The footpath is too narrow to ride bikes on and pass
people” (MS)

Both of these children express frustration at the inability to

ride their bikes in dense suburban areas. Cyclists are not

supposed to travel on the footpaths (which in any case are

by no means free from danger), while the risks of cycling on

the road are irrefutable (and feature prominently in the

minds of many parents). A third option, increasingly com-

mon in Auckland, is shared cycle/bus lanes. These did little
if anything to address the problem:

MS Girl 1: “When you’re riding your bike, it’s fun,

but the roads are too wide and the footpaths are like

this small [indicates with hands]. There’s bike lanes on
a couple of roads around here, but you can’t ride in
those because your parents won’t let you, because a
car might swerve and hit you
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627                                         623
MS Girl 2: “And the bike lanes ƒ they have buses
travelling in them! Bikes are so small and buses are
really, really big, like 2000 times bigger. Lots of kids
get freaked out if they get near a bus”

While safety was a concern for children from a higher

socio-economic background, the Maungawhau Primary

pupils were more concerned about recreational activities

and having social time with their friends. Although children

retain the ability to make and shape space, even under

adverse conditions – indeed, this is a prominent theme in

the international literature on children’s geographies

(Jones, 2000; Swart-Kruger and Chawla, 2002) – the combi-

nation of chauVeuring, privatised recreational activities,

and parental prohibitions on independent play and travel

may have largely removed children of higher socio-eco-

nomic backgrounds from inner Auckland public spaces. In

the case of Maungawhau, children appeared resigned to the

fact that the situation in their neighbourhood was not

going change and they would continue to be conWned to

play in ‘safe’ private space.

In addition to the principal fears of traYc and public

space, children discussed other aspects of urban life which

they considered dangerous. Uneven pavements were com-

monly mentioned, with children expressing concern over

tripping on the cracks and lumps as they walked (or ran) in

public space. “The front of your foot could fall into it and

you could get a big bruise and lots of scrapes” (MJ – see

Fig. 2). Others commented that the uneven and broken

pavement was “all dirty and you could fall over. It doesn’t

look very nice” (RJ).

Litter was also a frequently-photographed phenomenon.

While children acknowledged that some litter was not nec-

essarily ‘dangerous’, they commented that it was unsightly
and that they would prefer a clean and tidy neighbourhood.
The case study children took notice and commented on
almost everything they passed throughout the walk around
the neighbourhood. Even specks of glass did not go unno-
ticed, presumably because Auckland children commonly
walk in bare feet.
A ‘danger’ which only featured in the (gentrifying)
neighbourhood of Maungawhau was that of houses being
refurbished. The houses pictured in Fig. 3 were on a road

bordering the school. Both construction sites blocked the

sidewalk, one with setting concrete and the other with a

large hole and a token cone warning of its presence. They

were seen to be a danger to the safety of those walking to

and from school, although sometimes this concern became

fanciful.

“These people are doing concrete on the driveway
and they’ve got these four wooden things and two

trucks ƒ and if kids get stuck in the cement they

could stay there for ever and ever and die” (MJ).

While a general wariness of traYc and strangers was identi-
Wable across all schools, speciWc fears permeated some
groups of children more than others. Waterview children,

624                                          H. Mitchell et al.
Fig. 2. Cracked pavement –
Fig. 3. Renovating house –
for instance, expressed concerns about stranger danger,
recounting stories of people to be feared in their area, and
the places they are known to frequent. Yet, despite the fear
of strangers, the Waterview neighbourhood displayed a
degree of social connectedness that was not shown within
the other case study schools: for example, the children
knew and spoke of people who lived in the area who were
not part of the school community.
Mt. Roskill pupils were primarily concerned with the
road and traYc danger. This fear permeated the school
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627
picture by Maungawhau Junior.
picture by Maungawhau Senior.
community and the school’s attitudes and teachings. This is
because the school is sited in a heavily traYcked area and
the children are continually warned and reminded of the
danger that lies outside their school gates. As a result the
children of Mt. Roskill, in particular, recognised the school
as a safe haven, away from the dangers of public space.
Maungawhau Primary students, on the other hand, were
less fearful of traYc and strangers and more concerned
about access to play areas. These children felt the loss of
such areas due to the increased density of their neighbour-

H. Mitchell et al.
hood, and the way in which construction impinged on their
ability to explore public space. Complaints about traYc
reducing their quality of life, and about constant parental
surveillance, were common. The Maungawhau children
also desired the closeness of friends because proximity
would result in more play encounters.

6. Conclusion

Our paper’s key contribution has been to see the nuances
of neighbourhoods through children’s eyes. We investi-
gated how children feel about travelling to school and how
they perceive the local public spaces of their neighbour-
hoods. Few studies have investigated primary school-aged
children’s perspectives of home–school journeys, and fewer
still have delved into examining how children would change
their journey if they were able. Our research invited chil-
dren to answer these questions through a mixed methodol-
ogy involving writing activities, photovoice and discussion
groups. Following earlier applications (e.g., Aitken and
Wingate, 1993) we found photovoice to be particularly use-
ful in portraying what children perceived as dangerous in
their neighbourhood, while the discussion groups yielded
detailed insights into children’s perceptions of neighbour-
hood space more generally.
The paper sought Wrst to understand how children cur-
rently travel to school in Auckland City. At our case-study
schools, over half made the journey accompanied by an
adult, and the vast majority of these trips were by private
car. Adult accompaniment was most common within the
most aZuent neighbourhood. Second, we sought to ascer-
tain the ways in which children desire to travel within their
neighbourhoods, and their views on why they are often
unable to realise these desires. We found that over half of
the children who wrote about their travel preferences
wished to change their current mode of transport. Of those
currently being driven, almost half (45%) expressed a desire
for a more active travel mode, with many expressing an
enthusiasm for exploring the local environment. Third, in
response to calls to acknowledge diVerence in children’s
experience, we investigated how children’s perspectives of
their neighbourhoods vary by age, socio-economic status
and school location. Our data showed that, in addition to
well-researched parental fears and restrictions, children’s
own fears limit their use of public space. However there
were clear diVerences across the schools, reXecting local cir-
cumstances.
Our Auckland case studies revealed that many children
desire to travel independently within public space but are
constrained in their ability to act on this desire. In the emo-
tional geography of neighbourhood in Auckland, the ‘local
sphere’ between home and school appears increasingly
ambiguous: while many children Wnd it appealing, they also
recognise it as a site of risk and uncertainty – in contradis-
tinction to the school itself, which they universally imagine
as ‘safe’. This ambiguity did not translate into widespread
enthusiasm for travelling by car: child passengers were gen-
/ Geoforum 38 (2007) 614–627                                          625
erally negative about this transport option, complaining of
boredom and the inability to experience their local neigh-
bourhood. The children who walked, however, were mostly
positive about their journey, echoing other recent research
in Auckland (Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).
Those participants who expressed a desire for more
active forms of travel oVered reasons that were consistent
with Wndings previously noted in the children’s geogra-
phies literature: the desire for social interaction, spatial
exploration and perceived health beneWts. However in
contrast to this literature, which focuses on recommenda-
tions from professionals, our research provided an oppor-
tunity for children to convey their own opinions about
everyday transportation. Our analysis revealed that chil-
dren recognise many of the reasons for change towards
‘active transport’ advocated by health promoters and
transport planners. This observation was consistent
across the socio-economic levels represented within the
case study schools. However, a range of fears and obsta-
cles appear to block children from adopting their desired
modes of travel.
As long as children are seen as ‘innocents’ in need of
protection, they are going to have limited agency in travel
decisions and highly contingent access to public space. This
social construction presents an ongoing challenge to travel
planners and children’s advocates. The challenge is all the
more pressing, given the growing recognition that child
friendly cities are better cities for children and adults (Glee-
son and Sipe, 2006). Our research has oVered evidence of
children seeking, and in some instances exercising, agency
with respect to their routine mobility. It reveals them to be
actors whose daily lives incorporate active negotiation of
the constraints prevailing within their households and
neighbourhood contexts.
To this extent, our example of school travel illustrates a
pervasive and mundane example of the structure/agency
dynamic and the way that individual and collective action
is invariably constrained, yet holds capacity to be transfor-
mative (see Dyck and Kearns, 2006). This dynamic is
worked out through parents being the bearers and inter-
preters of two related sets of structural impediments to
children’s independent mobility: anxiety around safety,
much of it media-fuelled, and employment-generated rou-
tines which mean that adults are driving to work at the
same time as children are making their way to school. Here
we see our work concurring with that of Barker (2003):
rather than being mere passengers, children have the
capacity to contest being driven, and in so doing partici-
pate in the micro-politics of household life. This agency is
signiWcant in part because of its capacity to map onto
neighbourhoods in terms of activity patterns. While the
discourse of parents protecting their children from strang-
ers and traYc by oVering them safety within vehicles
remains socially powerful, this research with children has
revealed an alternative set of voices that value active
travel, outdoor environments, and the ability to navigate
one’s own path to school.
