

Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Travel Behaviour and Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tbs
Transport and child well-being: An integrative review
E.O.D. Waygood a,<U+21D1>, Margareta Friman b, Lars E. Olsson b, Ayako Taniguchi c
a
École supérieure d’aménagement du terroire et de développement régional (ÉSAD), FAS-1622, Université Laval, Québec, Canada
b
The Service and Market Oriented Transport Research Group (SAMOT), Karlstad University, Sweden
c
Department of Risk Engineering, University of Tsukuba, Japan
a r t i c l e         i n f o                           a b s t r a c t
Article history:                                        Understanding children’s travel is an important part of drawing a complete picture of over-all well-being
Received 10 June 2016                                   in society. Children’s active travel to school, independent travel, transport and physical activity, and
Received in revised form 29 March 2017                  crashes have been reviewed, yet it may not be a complete picture. If research on children’s travel has
Accepted 7 April 2017
the ultimate goal of improving children’s well-being, there is currently no general synthesis on the
Available online 14 April 2017
research linking transport and child well-being. This integrative review asks, ‘‘what evidence is there that
transport affects child well-being?” It organizes the findings by two key measures: the domain of well-
Keywords:
being and the transport means-of-influence. The five main domains of child well-being are: physical,
Children
Transport
psychological, cognitive, social, and economic. The three means of transport influence are: as access,
Well-being                                              intrinsic, or external. Findings are identified as being consistent, inconsistent, or one-off (e.g. only one
Physical                                                study). The results show that transport plays a role in all domains of children’s well-being. Most benefits
Psychological                                           identified are associated with active travel and independent travel. Most negative impacts are associated
Cognitive                                               with traffic. While numerous one-off results exist which suggest that there may be many other impacts,
Social                                                  research that repeats prior work is needed to support or refute these such results. Finally, potential rela-
Economic                                                tionships between transport and well-being are suggested.
Ó 2017 Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction                                                                           (e.g. Hillman et al., 1990). The chauffeuring burden could be quan-
tified through the value of time of the parent.
Research on the links between transport and well-being of                                 One method of reducing the chauffeuring burden would be
adults has gained traction in the past few years (e.g. Reardon and                        autonomous travel. This has the additional benefit of including
Abdallah, 2013). Unfortunately, research on the relation with child                       active travel (either as one component, or the complete trip).
well-being is not available from one source, but is rather dispersed                      One of the first papers to suggest that active travel might play an
over many studies. There is a considerable body of research and                           important role in children’s daily physical activity was by Tudor-
reviews from the past decade that seeks to explain children’s travel                      Locke et al. (2001). The research on active travel gained momen-
and reviews of such research exist (e.g. Sirard and Slater, 2008).                        tum as questions surrounding obesity began to emerge. A recent
However, the reason for studying children’s transport is not always                       review examined whether there was a clear relationship between
clear as transport planning is often based on the value of time, a                        autonomy, active travel, and weight status (Schoeppe et al.,
metric that includes travel for work or travel’s relationship with                        2013). Autonomous travel’s positive contribution to physical activ-
an individual’s income (though this approach is being contested)                          ity was supported, though the relationship with obesity was not
(Ettema et al., 2011; Jain and Lyons, 2008). These metrics are based                      clear. With respect to explaining the likelihood of autonomous tra-
more on adults than children. Children do not work and have no                            vel, a previous review of autonomous travel examined the methods
‘‘value of time”, so one previous justification for children’s travel                     used in such research and suggested a more complete behavioural
research was the increasing dependence of children on parents                             model (Mitra, 2013).
for travel. Framing children’s travel in this way negates their                               A non-economic concern was raised with respect to traffic dan-
autonomy and increases the chauffeuring burden on the parent                              ger. The World Health Organisation produced a report showing
that globally motor vehicles were the number one cause of death
for individuals under the age of 25 (Toroyan and Peden, 2007).
With road traffic crashes, impacts such as property damage or
<U+21D1> Corresponding author.                                                                 physical harm are often measured. However, although such reports
E-mail address: owen.waygood@esad.ulaval.ca (E.O.D. Waygood).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2017.04.005
2214-367X/Ó 2017 Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




























































E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
mention that impacts apart from physical harm exist such as psy-
chological impacts, they are not detailed.
While the economic and physical well-being attributes of chil-
dren’s travel have been studied and reviewed, the current body
of transport research does not address how transport influences
many facets of well-being beyond physical activity and road traffic
crashes. As a primary goal of planning is to improve the well-being
of society, the question here is: what evidence is there that transport
affects child well-being more holistically?
Previous research has looked at child well-being or quality of

life. Such research focused on transport (Hillman, 1993), the built
environment (Lennard and Lennard, 2000), children in urban envi-
ronments (Davis and Jones, 1996), or children and planning
(Matthews and Limb, 1999; Gilbert and O’Brien, 2005). The first
(Hillman, 1993) is an edited book containing a collection of articles
that deal with many of the topics to be addressed in this review.
Lennard and Lennard (Lennard and Lennard, 2000) take an archi-
tectural approach relating many of their arguments to social and
community interaction, amongst others. Davis and Jones (Davis
and Jones, 1996), focus on the differences between needs, percep-
tions, and affordances between children and adults in urban set-
tings. Finally, Matthews and Limb (Matthews and Limb, 1999)
convincingly argue that much of Western planning focuses on
the needs of one group, ‘‘white, ableist, adult, male, middle-
class.” Gilbert and O’Brien (Gilbert and O’Brien, 2005) make a sim-
ilar argument. They highlight that planning focuses on the needs of
adults, which likely leads to a system where children are more and
more dependent on adults for their transport. Taken together,
those books and articles make coherent arguments for improving
transport planning with respect to children’s well-being, but often
lack references to support their assertions. This review will help fill
that gap by providing an overall view of the research literature
dealing with impacts of transport on child well-being.


2. Conceptual framework


2.1. Defining well-being


Well-being is a commonly used, but ill-defined term (Pollard

and Lee, 2003; Dodge et al., 2012). Pollard and Lee (2003) explain

that depending on the field of research it can refer to happiness,

self-esteem, standard of living, or lack of depression. Those authors

suggest that the following definition is the most useful: well-being

is ‘‘a multidimensional construct incorporating mental/psycholog-

ical, physical, and social dimensions.” Dodge et al. (2012) conclude

their article by defining well-being (or wellbeing) through a frame-

work that balances resources and challenges in the three primary
domains of psychological, physical, and social. In such, they discuss
the importance of challenges to avoid personal stagnation. In Pol-

lard and Lee’s review (Pollard and Lee, 2003), which focused on
children’s well-being, they further suggest cognitive well-being

(for example intellectual or learning related) and economic (pri-

marily related to the economic situation of the household to which

the child belongs). For each domain, the authors provide a list of

measures that were used. That list is used in this review to identify

obvious omissions for transport related impacts.


2.2. How transport affects well-being

How transport influences child well-being is a critical piece to
consider. We propose that transport affects well-being through at

least three means-of-influence (Fig. 1): as access, intrinsic (i.e. dur-

ing travel), and external (i.e. transport by others). The original, and
perhaps most common, approach is to examine transport as a
means of access (e.g. to school). The second would be what impacts
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                                       33










Fig. 1. Conceptual framework of child well-being and the three means of impact
through which transport can affect them.


exist during travel whether they are intrinsic (e.g. active travel) or
potential (e.g. a crash not caused by others1). The third would be
the impacts that accrue to the child due to society’s transport beha-
viour (e.g. noise and air pollution; crashes caused by others1). The
impacts on child well-being in this review will be categorised by
those three means of impact.
The objective of this review is to find what different relation-
ships between transport and child well-being exist. Previously
reviewed areas such as explaining trips to school (e.g. Mitra,
2013; Pont et al., 2009) or the potential for active travel to con-
tribute to a child’s physical health (e.g. Schoeppe et al., 2013) are
summarized, but are not discussed extensively as such discussions
exist in those reviews. Literature related to those areas were elim-
inated from the papers reviewed in this work. The intention is to
create a resource for the general state of knowledge on the topic
of transport and child well-being.
The findings are organised by the conceptual framework dis-
played in Fig. 1. As shown, the transport influences are first organ-
ised by the relevant domain of well-being identified by Pollard and
Lee (2003), and then by the means-of-influence by transport. If
similar findings occur, these are termed ‘‘consistent findings”
meaning that some corroboration exists. The term ‘‘inconsistent”

is used for findings that do not support each other. For example,
one article reports a correlation, while another finds no correlation.

In many cases, associations are found, but are not tested or
reported in other papers found through this review. In those cases,

the term ‘‘anecdotal” is used for these one-off findings.

Consideration to cultural-specific findings is given as well. Two

reports with the same finding from the same country would imply

country-consistent findings. Reports from culturally similar (e.g.

Canada, the USA, Australia, New Zealand) would imply cultural-

consistent findings. Consistent findings across divergent cultures

would imply more universally consistent results. Thus, consistent

findings are identified as either culturally specific or international.



3. Method


This is an integrative review. An integrative review differs from

other types of reviews (e.g. systematic, meta-analysis) as it allows

for the combination of quantitative and qualitative research

(Whittemore and Knafl, 2005). It differs from systematic reviews

that use explicit quality criteria to summarize and synthesize

empirical data, or meta-analysis reviews that use statistical analy-
sis to combine evidence from multiple primary studies. Integrative
reviews differ from meta-synthesis reviews that aim to interpret
and present a number of qualitative studies. Transport research
encompasses a vast range of methods that include quantitative

1
To help explain our approach to the difference between a crash not cause by
others and a crash caused by others, let us take the example of a bicycle crash in two
different situations. A child crashes their bike trying to do a jump would be a crash
not caused by others. A child on a bicycle who is hit by a non-attentive driver is a
crash caused by others.

34                                            E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
and qualitative results, and to exclude qualitative research when
dealing with less-quantifiable aspects of travel would limit the
potential of this review to address its research question. The objec-
tive of an integrative review is to bring together past research and
to identify obvious gaps by summarizing the findings of numerous
studies that address a particular problem or phenomenon. In such
reviews, all relevant literature on the problem or topic should be
included. The purpose of this integrative review is to summarize
evidence on interactions between transport and child well-being
rather than giving a critical analysis of the literature.
To enhance the rigor of this type of review, the literature search
process is described, along with inclusion and exclusion criteria.
There are no gold standards of how to measure quality in reviews,
and for integrative reviews the inclusion criteria will relate to the
sampling frame (Whittemore and Knafl, 2005).
The primary source of papers was the Web of Science Core Col-
lection. The search was composed of these keywords: in title:
child/; within the topic: (travel OR transport/ or mobilit/) NOT (organ
OR gene/ OR membrane OR obesity OR plasm/ OR joint/). The search
was repeated with FRANCIS (humanities and social sciences) and
the International Bibliography of the Social Sciences. No limit to
the year of publication was given. Due to the search words, the
papers found had an English title and at least an English abstract.
However, papers in French, German, Japanese, Norwegian, Spanish
and Swedish were read and included where relevant. The search
was last conducted on 7 January 2016.


3.1. Eligibility criteria

Following the search by keywords described above, papers were
initially selected following these criteria:

1) Paper related to children’s local travel (as opposed to inter-
city or international travel) or to the impact of transport
on children;
2) Paper was not explaining mode use by built environment,
parent’s attitudes/values, socio-economic measures (reviews
exist);
3) Paper was not primarily examining the role of active trans-
port, or transports role on physical activity or obesity
(reviews exist);
4) Paper does not relate to physical impacts of crashes (reviews
exist).
More than 271 papers were selected through this process and

then reviewed. They were then grouped by theme: accessibility

(8); autonomy (40); environmental (3); experience of travel (22);

health (43); mode choice (18); quality of life (13); safety (76);

social (15); spatial maps (8); noise (9); and other (16). Next, the

papers were classified by their relation to one of the child well-

being domains (see Fig. 1, based on Pollard and Lee’s (2003) cate-

gorisation). After removing the papers that were not within the

objective of the study, a total of 93 papers were retained.

The papers come from 19 different countries. Of the papers

cited, 37 relate to European countries, 19 relate to North America,

18 relate to Oceania, 7 relate to Asia, one each from Iran and Peru,

and the remaining 10 are reviews.


4. Review results

Each section briefly introduces the domain of well-being and
gives examples of relevant measures. At the end of each section,
findings are summarized with consistent and contradictory find-
ings highlighted. A table is given listing relevant measures for
the domain from Pollard and Lee (2003) along with the measures
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49
found in the review or potentially relevant measures where none
were found. Those lists are not exhaustive; most likely other rele-
vant measures exist.

4.1. Physical

Indicators from the physical domain include health compromis-
ing behaviours, exercise, or safety-related behaviour (Pollard and
Lee, 2003). As mentioned, this review did not seek out articles on
relations recently reviewed such as active travel (and its associa-
tions with overall physical activity and obesity) (e.g. Panter et al.,
2008; Schoeppe et al., 2013) or crashes (Toroyan and Peden,
2007). However, a short summary of that work is given in the rel-
evant transport means-of-influence section.


4.1.1. Transport as access
Transport allows individuals to reach activities that facilitate
physical activity such as active play, sports, or recreation. A recent
review found that active travel was consistently associated with
more leisure activities and independent (or autonomous) mobility
with more physical activity (Schoeppe et al., 2013). Children’s
independent mobility (CIM) was positively associated with every-
day structured exercise (Page et al., 2010). As well, for boys, CIM
was positively associated with the likelihood of play, of structured
exercise, and active commuting. For girls, it was only associated
with active commuting [ibid].
Access to health services is a key constituent of transport for
well-being. For parents without cars, transport problems were
identified as one of five key barriers to accessing health services
in the US (Grineski, 2008). The transport system and public trans-
port are not fundamentally designed with such needs in mind,
which ultimately could influence the choice to visit a hospital, or
limit the choice of hospital to those hospitals with better non-car
access.
Finally, Davis and Jones (1997) argued that the lack of access,
sense of insecurity and fear are likely more serious health prob-
lems than declining participation in organised sports in the UK.
Related to that finding, families in rural areas mentioned transport
and opportunities for participation as barriers to physical activity
(Smith et al., 2010). In that study, low-income families had similar
problems.
Consistent findings: active travel is positively associated with lei-
sure activities; CIM is positively associated with physical activity.

4.1.2. Intrinsic influences through transport

With respect to decreases in physical activity and increases in

weight problems, recent research on child well-being has focused

considerable attention on active travel. Schoeppe et al. (2013)

reported that a positive association was found between active tra-

vel and physical activity. However, evidence supporting a link

between active travel to school and weight status was ‘‘evident

but . . . inconsistent”. Thus, active travel can have a positive impact

on physical activity, but its role in weight status is not clear.

Panter et al. (2008) examined environmental determinants on

active travel. They found that active travel was positively associ-

ated with social interactions, active travel facilities, neighbourhood

urban form, shorter route distance, and safety of the route. Improv-
ing the likelihood of such behaviour was influenced by physical
aspects (infrastructure, distances), social relations, and safety.
Air quality relates to children’s respiratory diseases and has
been examined both for in-vehicle and a result of vehicle use. In-
vehicle air quality can relate to exhaust, but also by another pas-
senger’s behaviour. Smoking in vehicles can expose children to sig-
nificant second-hand smoke even if the window of the smoker is
half-open (Sendzik et al., 2009).

E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
Air quality in school buses was found to be worse than at bus
stops or drop-off zones at schools in the USA (Behrentz et al.,
1995). If the windows are closed on the bus, the air quality is
affected most by the bus’s exhaust. If the windows are open, then
the air quality is affected most by the context of the surrounding
traffic. Children on school buses inhale more than 100 times more
bus exhaust than people who live by a school bus route (Marshall
and Behrentz, 2005). These studies point to an issue with the
motor type and route choice for school buses.
Consistent findings: active travel contributes to daily physical
activity.
Inconsistent findings: active travel to school is not consistently
associated with higher weight status.

4.1.3. External influences of transport
Traffic danger is a safety concern for many parents and relates
to the measure of safety-related behaviour. A WHO review
(Toroyan and Peden, 2007) found that road traffic crashes are a
serious public health issue globally, with low-income countries
being particularly affected. Globally, crashes are the leading cause
of death for those under 25, with males more commonly involved
in collisions. In low income countries the victims are more likely to
be vulnerable road users, whereas in wealthy countries it is young
male drivers. From that review it is not clear whether children in
developed countries where walking is high and motor use is low
are safer than the inverse in terms of population impact. However,
a recent study found that the death rate per capita for child pedes-
trians was roughly equal in Japan and Canada, but children are
much more frequently killed in motorised vehicles in Canada lead-
ing to a per capita death rate roughly three times that of Japan
(Waygood et al., 2015).
The majority of air pollution in urban environments is attribu-
ted to vehicular emissions (Seaton et al., 1995; McNabola et al.,
2009). Although those papers state this, they do not reference stud-
ies that demonstrate this. However, the majority of childhood
asthma costs are due to traffic-related pollutants in California, US
(Brandt et al., 2012). During the Atlanta Olympics, children’s visits
to hospitals for acute asthma cases significantly dropped when
congestion was restricted and managed for the Olympics
(Friedman et al., 2001). Air pollutants associated with increased
child respiratory treatments are (Beatty and Shimshack, 2014):
particulate matter 10 mm or less in diameter (PM10), carbon
monoxide (CO), and ozone (O3). As well, nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
from freeways was found to be associated with asthma in children
(Gauderman et al., 2005), though the association was found for liv-
ing close to freeways. No association was found for the amount of
traffic. Traffic-related air pollution by homes and schools may con-
tribute to the development of asthma (McConnell et al., 2010).
High traffic flows related to reduced air quality are linked to areas
where low income groups live in California (Gunier et al., 2003)
and in Canada (Chaudhuri, 1998) suggesting a problem of environ-
mental justice (Pabayo et al., 2012), where those not responsible
for the pollution are suffering the negative externalities of those
who are creating the traffic.
Increased blood pressure is one of the more common associa-
tions between traffic noise and children’s health. A review
(Paunovic et al., 2011) of epidemiological studies found that road
traffic is positively associated with an increase in blood pressure
in children. Systolic pressure was found to be higher, and heart
rates were also higher for children in noisy residences (Belojevic
et al., 2008). In a paper published after the review by Paunovic
et al. (2011), the blood pressure of children with bedrooms that
face busy streets was found to be higher (Liu et al., 2013). Related
to blood pressure, a review of transport noise on health and cogni-

tive development found that it affects cardiovascular disease and
catecholamine secretion. Hypertension and sleep disturbance were

Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                                       35
also related to the prevalence of traffic noise, though adaptation
may exist (Clark and Stansfeld, 2007).
‘‘Lead is a well-known toxin, and its neurotoxic impact on chil-
dren is strongly associated with problems that are extremely costly
to society, including learning deficits, socialization, violent beha-
viour and other health problems” (Mielke et al., 2010). Those
impacts relate also to children’s cognitive and social well-being.
In Peru, where leaded gasoline was still used, it was linked to
higher blood-lead levels in children (Naeher et al., 2004). An Aus-
tralia paper found that lead being transported in trucks covered
by tarpaulins was not associated with higher levels of blood level
content in children (Mak et al., 2003). Another paper related to lead
looked at the legacy impact of lead contained in gasoline between
1927 and 1994 in eight urbanized areas of California (Mielke et al.,
2010). That paper details how to identify problem areas, thus
allowing for authorities to prioritize cleaning of lead dust from soil
in locations where children congregate.
The relation between transport and childhood leukaemia has
recently been reviewed in two articles, with a third conducting a
meta-analysis. The first review found that residential traffic expo-
sure during the postnatal period was associated with childhood
leukaemia (Boothe et al., 2014). The second supported the finding
of the previous and emphasized the role of benzene (Filippini et al.,
2015). Finally, a meta-analysis examined studies of benzene from
traffic density and traffic-related air pollution. The summary rela-
tive risk was reported to be 1.48 for childhood leukaemia (Carlos-
Wallace et al., 2016). Earlier studies (Reynolds et al., 2002;
Reynolds et al., 2004) in the USA examined the exposure to traffic
with rates of all childhood cancer. The first (Reynolds et al., 2002)
examined children under the age of 15 in California in 1988 to
1994. It found a very small positive association between high traf-
fic density and all cancers, leukaemias, and gliomas. As the rela-
tionship was found to be small, the authors argued that the rates
were not higher in high traffic areas. The second (Reynolds et al.,
2004) focused on children under the age of five who had cancer
and used controlled match subjects to test the influence of road
density and traffic density. That paper did find a higher instance
of central nervous system (CNS) tumours in areas with high traffic
density, but with no evidence of a dose response. Those findings
have recently been supported with increased risks found for cen-
tral nervous system primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET)
and medulloblastoma (von Ehrenstein et al., 2015). In all cases
where relationships were found, it was for children under the
age of six.
Consistent findings: Crashes as the main cause of death of chil-
dren and youth around the world; positive associations between
traffic emissions and asthma; traffic noise and increased blood
pressure; traffic and childhood leukaemia; traffic and central ner-
vous system tumours.


4.1.4. Summary of physical well-being relations
Positive influences on children’s physical activity were found
through active travel and CIM, by the means-of-influence access
and intrinsic (Table 1). However, external influences of traffic such
as emissions, noise, and traffic density are shown to have clear and
serious negative effects on children’s physical well-being in the
form of various cancers and tumours.
The lower number of one-off2 relationships (four) as compared
to consistent results suggests that this domain of well-being is
well-studied. However, there remain results (see Table 1) to be cor-
roborated and interactions that have not been studied3.

2
One-off is used in this article to refer to a finding that is not corroborated by a
second study.
3
Or at least were not found through the search.

36                                                         E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
Table 1
Relevant measures of physical well-being and their association with transport
(Acc = access; Intr = intrinsic; Ext = External).

Measure                                     Relationships where found
Health compromising behaviours/             Acc: Active travel associated with
Health promoting behaviours;             more leisure activitiesR,INT; CIM with
exercise; physical health                more physical activitiesR,INT; CIM
with more structured exerciseA; lack
of access and decreased

participationA
Intr: Active travel is associated with
greater physical activity overallR,Int;
physical structureS; vitamin ES

Ext: collision related death or serious
injuryR,Int
Physical manifestations of stress           Ext: Traffic noise is associated with
high blood pressureR,INT
Physical manifestations of illness          Intr: Active travel is inconsistently
related to obesityR,IF;

Ext: High traffic density is associated
with childhood asthmaCF,INT; high
traffic density is associated with
childhood leukaemia for children
under 6 years oldR,INT; exposure to

traffic and blood-lead in countries
which continue to have leaded fuelA
Nutrition                                   Acc: Food deserts and access to
healthy choicesS; Int: Walking and
digestionS
Safety-related behaviour                    Ext: Vulnerable road usersR,Int; driver

behaviourR,Int
Physical abuse                              Intr: Personal securityS
OTHER                                       Acc: Access to health servicesA
Intr: Air quality in carsA; School bus
interior vehicle air quality was found
to be worse than at bus stopsA

R = review; S = suggested; CF = consistent findings; IF = inconsistent findings;
A = anecdotal; Int = International; CS = country-specific.


4.2. Psychological


The psychological domain includes indicators that pertain to

emotions, mental health, and mental illness. Psychosocial perspec-

tives fall within the psychological domain. Measures include anxi-

ety, depression, anger, stress, autonomy, life satisfaction,

happiness, positive/negative affect, self-esteem and stress manage-

ment (Pollard and Lee, 2003).


4.2.1. Transport as access
The importance of the influence of a destination’s activity on
psychological measures such as subjective well-being have been
studied for adults (e.g. Bergstad et al., 2012), and there is some sug-
gestion that similar results would be found for children. Enjoyment
was found to be more associated with the destination type than
what mode children used to get there (Barker, 2006).
As will be shown later in the section on social well-being, chil-
dren desire to meet with friends. The ability to access those friends
may be linked to higher CIM (see later section). Conversely, the
psychosocial measure of loneliness was associated with lower
CIM (Pacilli et al., 2013).
Consistent: No corroborating studies were found.

4.2.2. Intrinsic influences through transport
In Denmark, route choice and modal choice were associated
with ‘‘affect management” (that is, managing one’s emotions) by
both children and adults, where the individual would choose a
route or a mode for its associated positive affect (e.g. more relax-
ing, less stressful, safer, etc.) (Jensen et al., 2014). This might sug-
gest that people make choices based on anticipated affect, thus
limiting any variation between modes. That logic was somewhat
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49
confirmed in a prior study in Sweden that examined activation
and valence (e.g. feeling happy/sad) during the route to school

and found no significant effects by mode (Westman et al., 2013).
However, a study from Canada (Ramanathan et al., 2014) that
examined positive and negative emotions related to the trip to
school found that most parents and children report positive emo-
tions, but that children who use active modes (AT) and their par-


ents report statistically more positive emotions. Parents of
children who use passive modes were more likely to report nega-
tive emotions. A second Swedish study (Westman et al., 2015)
showed that travel by car and longer travel negatively affect chil-

dren’s satisfaction with travel. Results showed that travel by school

bus or active mode were felt to be of higher quality. In the Nether-
lands (Kopnina and Williams, 2012), affective associations to cars
had a wide variation.
In a study of children’s emotions during travel, it was found that

the walk to school can emotionally prepare children for the day

and that the return walk from school allows them to de-stress
(Murray and Mand, 2013). They also reported that the school bus
can be an ‘‘emotional battleground”. Engaging in solitary activities

during travel made children feel stressed (Westman et al., 2015).

Autonomous travel can likely give children a sense of control
and self-esteem. In Toronto, Canada, children who frequently used
bicycles were found to have higher feelings of self-esteem and con-
trol (van Vliet, 1983). As well, being able to relate to others is an

important part of developing relationships and a functioning soci-

ety (Eisenberg and Miller, 1987). Bicycling was found to make chil-
dren more empathetic (e.g. the ability to understand and share the
feelings of another) (Endoh, 1997).


4.2.2.1. Experience of travel – psychological domain. The experience
of travel could affect psychological well-being if the experience is
enjoyable, stressful, or other such emotional impacts. Walking
was associated with different emotional reactions. A Malaysian
study (Yatiman et al., 2012) on children in rural areas reported that

walking autonomously to and from school resulted in feelings of
excitement, joy, challenge and fear (of imaginary monkeys and

ghosts). In an urban setting, children in Belgium also highlighted

that experiences on route while walking and cycling were positive

factors associated with those modes (Zwerts et al., 2010). Chil-

dren’s appreciation of their walk positively increased with the

amount of vegetation present and the lower width of roads

(Watanabe et al., 1988).
Personal comfort varies by mode and children reported that
they liked being shielded from weather in cars (Barker, 2006). Sim-
ilarly, the comfort of cars was a positive aspect for girls in Belgium
(Zwerts et al., 2010).
Consistent findings: Positive experiences while walking; lower
stress with walking
Inconsistent findings: Relationship between mode to school and
measures of affect.

4.2.3. External influences of transport
Traffic noise can affect psychological well-being. Annoyance
was recorded in several articles (Clark and Stansfeld, 2007;
Babisch et al., 2012; van Kempen et al., 2009), though Babisch
et al. (2012) noted that children report annoyance less than adults.
Borderline or abnormal values were even found for the emotional
system scale (e.g. fears, worries, clingy, unhappy) (Tiesler et al.,
2013) where traffic noise was found on the least exposed side of
a house.
The physical impact of collisions is recorded through fatalities
and injuries, but their negative impacts on well-being are not lim-
ited to those physical ones. One third of children involved in a col-
lision reported psychological problems when questioned four to
seven months after the event (Ellis et al., 1998). Most related to tra-

E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
vel avoidance, 38% had travel anxiety, and 17% had nightmares or
other sleep difficulties. The parents in this study also became more

protective, restricting their child’s mobility (thus potentially limit-
ing the well-being benefits of CIM), and creating conflict. In a sec-
ond study of children who had been involved in collisions, the
majority of them were found to have psychological problems
(Bryant et al., 2004) such as re-experiencing the event up to six

months after. About one-fifth had post-traumatic stress disorder,
a third had travel avoidance, a third had travel anxiety, and nearly
half had social impairment. Sleep disturbance was reported for less
than 10% after two weeks.

Consistent findings: A positive association between traffic noise

and annoyance; travel avoidance, travel anxiety, and sleep difficul-
ties, and parents restricting CIM after collisions.

4.2.4. Summary of psychological domain

Transport was found to influence children’s psychological well-

being (Table 2) in both the short-term (e.g. experiences, activation)
and the long-term (e.g. as a result of road traffic crashes). The
majority of these influences were related to the external influence

of transport (traffic noise and collisions), while two positive asso-

ciations were found for walking (positive experiences and reduced
stress). The collision results could be termed ‘‘country-specific”
findings as both studies were from the UK. However, it is unlikely
that children would not be psychologically affected in different

geographic or cultural settings.

An inconsistent finding was found for the association of positive
or negative affect with mode. The two studies were conducted in

Canada and Sweden, with a much larger sample in Canada (5423
versus 206). In the Canadian study, the questions related to how
the child generally got to school, whereas in the Swedish study it
related to the trip just completed (the morning commute to
school). The two methods are not directly comparable. Whether
the child’s immediate experience differs from experiences in gen-
eral may be a matter for future research.
Nine different one-off relationships were identified, as com-
pared to five consistent findings, suggesting that more effort to
replicate findings is required.

4.3. Cognitive

The cognitive domain includes indicators that are considered
intellectual or school-related in nature. Examples include concen-
tration, school behavioural problems, cognitive ability, and aca-
demic achievement (Pollard and Lee, 2003).

4.3.1. Transport as access
The outdoors is an important developmental environment and
independent travel by children gives them greater opportunities
for growth and exploration (Björklid, 2004). Some children may
prefer to travel by car (Barker, 2009), but in numerous countries
children who travel by car lament the loss of experiences they
might gain through exploration (Barker, 2009; Mitchell et al.,
2007; Tranter and Pawson, 2001). Larger activity spaces relate to
the potential to explore and boys in Australia who had a bicycle
at home to ride and girls who had CIM had larger activity spaces
(Villanueva et al., 2012).
Consistent findings: Exploring is desirable and is not associated
with car travel.

4.3.2. Intrinsic influences through transport
A child who is more alert or awake may be more prepared to
learn and concentrate. In Sweden, children who cycled to school
had higher activation (e.g. more alert, awake) at school than chil-
dren who came by car (Westman et al., 2013). Related to this,
research in neuroscience finds that walking for twenty minutes
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                                        37
Table 2
Relevant measures of psychological well-being and their association with transport
(Acc = access; Intr = intrinsic; Ext = External).

Measure                   Relationships where found
Anxiety                   Ext: Post-collision, children had travel anxietyCF,CS;
Post-collision, children had travel avoidanceCF,CS
Emotional problems        Intr: Managing emotional outcomes related to
transport mode choiceA; The school bus as an
emotional battlegroundA
Fearfulness               Ext: Fear of traffic dangerS
Loneliness                Acc: Lower CIM was associated with loneliness A
Negative affect           Intr: Passive mode users were more likely to be
associated with negative emotionsA

Nightmares                Ext: Sleep problems or nightmares due to collisionsCF,
CS
Recurrent memories        Intr: Bullying during travelS
of bullying
Stress                    Intr: Being passive during travel increased stressCF;
post-collision post-traumatic stress disorderA; time-

dependent (e.g. punctual arrival) stressS; restorationS
Attachment                Intr: Place attachmentS
Autonomy                  Ext: Restricted CIM following a collisionCF,CS
Happiness                 Intr: Travel by car and longer trips were negatively
associated with trip satisfactionA

Life satisfaction         Acc/Intr/Ext: Life satisfactionS
Positive affect           Acc: positive affect from access to a destination that
brings positive affectA
Intr: Enjoyment and walkingCF,Int; positive affect
related to active modesIF;
Self-esteem               Intr: Self-esteem was associated with bicyclingA

OTHER                     Ext: Annoyance from traffic noiseCF,Int

R = review; S = suggested; CF = consistent findings; IF = inconsistent findings;
A = anecdotal; Int = international; CS = country-specific.


was associated with greater cognitive control and academic
achievement for preadolescents (Hillman et al., 2009). A later study
by Westman et al. (2015) found that social activities and smart-
phone use during travel had a positive relationship with perfor-
mance (here a word-fluency test) at school.
For children’s cognitive abilities, studies that examined spatial
mapping by children examined their capabilities and the content
of the images. Children who travelled by walking or public trans-
port were found to have better overall spatial maps (Ahmadi and
Taniguchi, 2007). In another study, the mode of travel was found
to have no relation, but CIM had a positive relation on non-
school journeys (Joshi et al., 1999). Related to that, children with
greater CIM covered larger areas on a mapping exercise
(Villanueva et al., 2012). In an earlier study, the spatial scale and
amount of detail provided related to the child’s usual mode, though
no further details were given to clarify this relationship (van Vliet,
1983).
Spatial clarity in mapping was linked with bus use and spatial
knowledge was linked with walking with parents (the possible
explanation being that parents discuss the surroundings with their
children as they walk) (Ahmadi and Taniguchi, 2007). However, in
an earlier study no relation was found with mode for environmen-
tal knowledge, though spatial knowledge did increase with paren-
tal escorting (Joshi et al., 1999). Boys were found to have lower
spatial knowledge (Ahmadi and Taniguchi, 2007), but travel longer
distances. Age was positively associated with increased environ-
mental knowledge (Matthews, 1984).


4.3.2.1. Experience of travel – cognitive domain. Child psychologist
Kegerreis (1993) describes the mental and emotional develop-
ments possible through independent travel. In that work, she talks
about the need to take responsibility for action or inaction, for suc-
cess or failure. By using their own resources, children learn to cope
with new experiences. These experiences can be seen in an Aus-
tralian study (Witten et al., 2015) on children in deprived inner city

38                                           E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
areas (typically a mixed measure of low socio-economic measures)
who talked about walking independently and becoming more con-

fident and discovering routes to avoid undesirable locations. They
further spoke of gaining experience in assessing risks and taking
action.
For Kegerreis the trip home from school is a time for children
to explore (see Hosoda and Nichide, 2009), take small risks, test

boundaries, and do mildly dangerous things, which are important
for their development. Children in Finland (Kullman, 2014) were
fascinated with aspects unobserved by adults: crumpled paper,
ice, tree branches, engaging with different textures and inclines,

running up and down things, and sliding on ice. The children

were using their environment to explore and learn. That reflects
previous assertions that trips are a play activity and a chance to
explore (Tranter and Pawson, 2001). In Japan, children’s move-
ment suggested exploring when taking the train to and from

school. Using GPS, the children who commuted by train were

observed to have moved in a slower and more leisurely way
when on foot travelling to/from the station than those commut-
ing by bus or only on foot (i.e. they did not use public transport).

The return trip from school by the train commuters was marked

by irregular speeds demonstrating that there was more to the
walk than just walking (Hosoda and Nichide, 2009). Trips solely

by foot had irregular speeds after school as well, but were quick
and direct in the morning (Ibid). For children who used the
bus, they moved quickly in the morning, and then slowly after

school.

Kegerreis continues with aspects of observation where the

children see more of the adult world, observing and learning

how to act or handle themselves in different situations; when

one is escorted, the experience is not the same, as the responsi-

bility lies with others. In New Zealand (Carroll et al., 2015), chil-

dren talked of experiences on the street such as looking at other

people, gardens, graffiti, shop displays and cafes. In Australia

(Romero, 2011; Romero, 2010), some children wished to walk

alone (19%) and the most common reason for that (36%) was

to have fun (related to psychological well-being), followed by

being able to dictate the duration and having time to think

(29%). In Finland Kullman (2010), trips to school included transi-

tional geographies and children would employ the slightest pos-

sible variations to create experiences. In Romero’s studies

(Romero, 2011; Romero, 2010), the categories for the most fun

thing during a trip were: experiencing the natural environment

(38% of walkers versus 21% in cars), social pursuits (23% of those

in cars), buildings, car activity, solitary pursuits, and people

activity. Discussions and activities during travel were also seen

as important (Barker, 2009).

Consistent findings: Increased spatial knowledge and being

accompanied by parents; observing and exploring the world

around them through walking/CIM.

Inconsistent findings: Relationships between better spatial maps

and greater spatial knowledge with mode of transport.



4.3.3. External influences of transport

Related to academic achievement, traffic noise affects both
reading speed and basic mathematic exercises, though reading
comprehension and mathematical reasoning were not affected
(Ljung et al., 2009). In that study, irrelevant speech did not affect
those measures suggesting that traffic noise is a greater problem
than such noise.
Most relationships with spatial maps that were examined dealt
with the mode used and demographic measures such as age and
gender. However, traffic danger and social insecurity were both
found to be negatively linked with spatial knowledge (Ahmadi
and Taniguchi, 2007).
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49
Table 3
Relevant measures of cognitive well-being (from Pollard and Lee, 2003) and their
association with transport (Acc = access; Intr = intrinsic; Ext = External).

Measure                            Relationships where found
Concentration                      Intr: Walking alone and having time to
thinkA
Academic achievement               Ext: Traffic noise negatively affects reading
speedA; reading comprehension was not
affected by traffic noiseA; basic mathematic
exercises were negatively affected by traffic
noiseA; math reasoning was not affected by
traffic noiseA
Cognitive ability                  Intr: Being alert (activation) was associated

with cycling to schoolA; modal
relationships with spatial mapping were:
betterINT, IF, levels of detailA, increased
knowledge with walkingINT, IF, clarity ( + for
bus)A; Intr: increased spatial knowledge
through travel with parentsCF,INT; CIM was

associated with covering more area on
spatial mapsA
OTHER: Learning from one’s         Intr: CIM and walking were associated with
environment/life                exploring one’s environmentCF,Int; positive
experiences*                    learning experiences with walking and

CIMCF,Int

R = review; S = suggested; CF = consistent findings; IF = inconsistent findings;
A = anecdotal; Int = international.



4.3.4. Summary of cognitive domain

Consistent findings related to cognitive well-being were limited

to: exploring while travelling other than by car; increase spatial

knowledge and being accompanied by parents; observing the

world around them through walking/CIM (Table 3).

For the inconsistent findings with respect to spatial mapping

(Ahmadi and Taniguchi, 2007; Joshi et al., 1999), both used free-

recall maps, the ages of the children were similar (9–13 versus

7–12) as were the sample sizes (75 versus 93). The latter paper

(Ahmadi and Taniguchi, 2007 by date of study) cited the former

and followed the same general approaches. However, a number

of differences can be observed: research domain (engineering

Ahmadi and Taniguchi, 2007 versus psychology (Joshi et al.,

1999), the measures applied (landmarks and route accuracy versus

picture type, loops, landmarks), the trips considered (only home-

school; home-school and non-school), the modes considered

(non-motorised, bus, car versus walking, car), geographic/cultural

context (Tehran, Iran versus two country townships in the UK),

built environment (linear versus curvilinear). Any number of these

differences might explain the results. For example, the linear nat-

ure of the development in Iran may be easier to draw, the inclusion

of bus travel, the measure of route accuracy, etc. The positive side

is the similarities (age, free-recall mapping, sample sizes) that tried

to limit the differences between the studies. The only way to gain

better insight would be to have studies that match as close as pos-

sible these existing studies.

There were 24 one-off relationships, with 11 of those related to
spatial mapping. Considerable potential exists here, but the lack of
repeated research questions and methods limits the strength of the

arguments.


4.4. Social

The social domain includes indicators such as anti-social beha-
viour, peer problems, participation in cultural activities, relation-
ships with others, social skills, and socioeconomic status (Pollard
and Lee, 2003).
Social well-being is perhaps less appreciated, or obvious, than
physical well-being, but improvements to society and social inter-
actions are nonetheless important. For example, social relation-

E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
ships were found to have a higher impact on mortality than alcohol
consumption, physical activity, BMI (obesity), and air quality; it
had a similar impact as smoking; and the impacts were not found
to be age-dependent (Holt-Lunstad et al., 2010). Thus, social rela-
tionships are important for health.

4.4.1. Transport as access
Trips for social reasons are common for adults, and are likely
common for children too (Sener and Bhat, 2007). CIM was posi-
tively associated with knowing where to get social interaction
(Lim and Barton, 2010) or having more local peers (Carver et al.,
2005). In a study of discretionary social activities, children in urban
settings (as opposed to suburban or rural) were more likely to par-
ticipate without other family members, which was attributed to
likely better conditions for CIM (Sener and Bhat, 2007). However,
the direction of the relationship is not clear: is it that having social
relationships within CIM distances stimulate CIM travel, or having
CIM allows one to meet new people and establish more social
contacts?
When children travel independently outside of their local areas
however, they are put in situations where they must deal with
unknown adults (e.g. paying the entrance fee at a swimming pool)
that conflict with the ‘‘don’t talk to strangers” message that they
are often taught in the UK (Milne, 2009). This could lead to feelings
of anxiety.
Parents way wish to ‘‘park” children in safe places (e.g. play in a
park, not on the road), but children may not be stimulated by such
places (Davis and Jones, 1996). This may be contrary to what is
often discussed for children’s development, but the experience of
children in inner city Los Angeles (Banerjee et al., 2014) high-
lighted that children liked commercial establishments more than
parks and recreational locations, as they are convivial places with
social interaction. The children enjoyed the presence of others
and the chance to ‘‘bump into friends.” This reflects findings from
an earlier study (Berg and Medrich, 1980) where children wanted
to live near shops. In New Zealand (Carroll et al., 2015) a study
of children’s experiences in the city found that children desire to
have friends close-by, places to play and a range of amenities to
access. In the USA, a study that looked at travel to discretionary
activities found that for children in urban areas (as opposed to sub-
urban or rural) were more likely to participate in shopping or
active recreation, suggesting that they had better access to such
activities (Sener and Bhat, 2007).
In some situations, children must rely (mostly) on parents for
their mobility. Parents may view low-density, car-oriented resi-
dential developments as desirable, but this has the effect of
marooning children and forcing dependence (Davis and Jones,
1996). Children who preferred to travel with a parent, as opposed
to independently, mentioned needing to get to a social activity
(Romero, 2010). Earlier research on different neighbourhood types
found that children in suburban areas uniformly disliked having to
rely on parents to make ‘‘trips” to meet friends (Berg and Medrich,
1980). In those low-density areas, travel by car was most common,
and socializing was more planned and formal, was less likely to be
with a group, and less likely to have a range of ages. Those issues
were thought to be related to problems of independent mobility
restrictions (ibid).
Consistent findings: The desire to meet friends locally.
Inconsistent findings: Resenting reliance on parents for social
trips and preferring travel with parents as it relates to social trips.

4.4.2. Intrinsic influences through transport
Interacting during travel is very desirable among children. In
Scotland, adolescent girls spoke of walking as an opportunity to
be with friends and socialize (Kirby and Inchley, 2013). The most
important aspect of travelling for children in a Belgian study, was
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                         39
the social aspect (Zwerts et al., 2010); the social aspect was more
valued by girls than boys. In Australia (Romero, 2011; Romero,
2010) and in the UK (Murray and Mand, 2013), trips were associ-
ated with meaningful experiences such as talking with friends. In
a study of children in inner city communities in Australia
(Witten et al., 2015), it was found that despite problems such as
‘‘weird” adults, the children valued being out and about alone as
it was a chance to hang-out with friends, to have fresh air, to feel
happy, not being embarrassed by being in the company of their
parents, and to simply be independent. Westman et al. (2015)
found that engagement in social activity during travel resulted in
the children reporting that the trip was of higher quality than if
they were alone or using their smartphones.
Having friends as trip companions is important to children. In
Switzerland (Fuhrer and Quaiser-Pohl, 1999), a study of travel by
10, 12, and 14 year olds found that trips with friends was most
common for 12 year olds. Children who walked mentioned talking
with friends as an important experience, versus children in cars
who spoke of being ‘‘safe from strangers” (Romero, 2010). In that
study, companions were often a desirable attribute of a trip
(50%) and 83% of the reason given for wanting to travel indepen-
dently was to freely engage in conversation with friends or sib-
lings. Separation from friends was seen as a negative aspect of
car travel (Barker, 2006). Streets in urban New Zealand were seen
as a place to walk and talk with friends and observe the world,
however, children also experienced being ‘‘told off” for being too
loud when they were laughing on their scooters (presumably with
friends) (Carroll et al., 2015). Around the world, socializing is an
important feature of travel for children.
Associations exist between children’s travel and social capital.
In a review of active travel, Panter et al. (2008) found that it was
positively associated with social interactions (waving or saying
hello to neighbours). Children’s autonomy (e.g. CIM) was associ-
ated with creating neighbourhood social capital (Weller and
Bruegel, 2009).
What mode a child uses can influence the frequency of inciden-
tal social connections. Waygood and Kitamura (2009) found that
CIM and seeing a known person during travel increased with pop-
ulation density, though a relationship was not directly demon-
strated. However using the same data set, walking and
independent trips were found to be positively associated with see-
ing a known person during the trip (Waygood and Friman, 2015).
Trips by car or bicycle were negatively associated. For seeing peo-
ple in general, travel by foot or bicycle and CIM were positively
associated with seeing people in general during the trip, while tra-
vel by car was highly negatively associated (Waygood and Friman,
2015).
Social interaction can also be with family members during tra-
vel. For trips in cars, it was found that children want a location
within the vehicle where their parents can intervene when dis-
putes arise between siblings (Barker, 2009). The choice of seats
was also found to lead to power struggles and conflicts (Barker,
2006).
Consistent findings: Desire social interaction during travel; social
interaction during travel is associated with walking; CIM and
active travel are related to community connections.


4.4.3. External influences of transport
One measure of social well-being listed by Pollard and Lee was
parent-child relations (Pollard and Lee, 2003). One study found that
time spent on one’s work commute by the parents did not diminish
time spent with children, which the authors suggested demon-
strated how important that activity is to parents (Whitehead-Frei
and Kockelman, 2010). However, in a study on raising children that
were under five years old in outer suburbs of the Australia

40                                           E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
(Andrews, 2010), many difficulties were raised including the nega-
tive effect on children by the father’s long commute.

The walkability of a neighbourhood has been studied for chil-
dren’s travel and relationships with their social well-being were
found. In a study of children’s representations of their daily lives
(Holt et al., 2008), children in low walkable neighbourhoods
depicted more cars and more supervised play which may limit

the child’s ability to develop conflict resolution skills. Children in
highly walkable neighbourhoods depicted more peer interaction.
Those findings related to an older study of children’s play where
the less urban (and what would now likely be termed less walka-

ble) the area, the more distances restricted social interactions to

planned occasions rather than spontaneous ones (Berg and
Medrich, 1980).
Traffic was also found to be a general deterrent. In a study of
children’s play patterns in the USA (Berg and Medrich, 1980), traf-

fic was found to be a barrier to access as it consumed the street

(e.g. prevented children from playing on the street) and limited
children’s active space near their home. In that study, mobility
was the topic discussed with the most interest by the children,

as they felt that traffic constrained their autonomy to play and

socialize. An article on children’s social capital and well-being dis-
cussed important influences beyond the child’s control such as

traffic, but also how much freedom (e.g. CIM) they have to engage
with their local community (Morrow, 1999).
The study of children’s experience’s in inner city Los Angeles

(Banerjee et al., 2014) found that residential streets were most

often mentioned as being disliked (76%) or unsafe (74%) due to

social incivilities and traffic concerns. Negative experiences
included streets with fast moving cars, freeways, and underpasses.
Children in urban New Zealand (Carroll et al., 2015) liked walking
and talking in the street, but did not like traffic.
Consistent findings: Less walkable areas restricted children’s
play to planned events; children did not like traffic as it limited
social interaction.


4.4.4. Summary of social domain
For the social domain, children were consistently found to
highly desire social interaction. The consist findings were: access
to friends, social interaction during travel, social interaction being
associated to walking, CIM and active transport relating to greater
community connections, a general dislike of traffic as it limited
social interaction, and areas that limited CIM limited spontaneous
social interaction (Table 4).
An inconsistent finding was found between some children pre-
ferring travel with their parents (Romero, 2010), to others resent-
ing their dependence on parents for transport (Berg and Medrich,
1980). The studies were respectively conducted in Sydney, Aus-
tralia with children aged 9 to 11 and in Oakland, USA with children
aged 11 and 12 years. It may be that the younger children in the
Australian study do not desire independence to the same extent
as the slightly older children. The Oakland study was larger (764
versus 178), but both studies had a diversity in urban settings
and used qualitative methods (interviews). The era of the study
may play a role as well, with the Sydney study published in 2010
and the Oakland study published in 1980; what is normal and chil-
dren’s expectations may have changed over those 30 years. The
research questions were different though, with the Oakland study
focusing on play and play patterns, whereas the Sydney study
looked at trips to school with a desire to improve the enjoyment
of walking to school. Thus, in the Sydney study, children were con-
sidering a different situation, and the use of cars may have been
seen by many children as how they access their social activities.
This might be related to the activity being more important than
the means of getting there.
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49
Table 4
Relevant measures of social well-being and their association with transport
(Acc = access; Intr = intrinsic; Ext = External).

Measure                       Relationships where found
Negative life events          Ext: CrashesR, Int
Peer problems                 Intr: Intimidation/bullying/assaultS
Family relations;             Intr: parent-child interaction during travelS
parent-child               Ext: Parents time with children was not affected by
relations                  commuting timeA;
Participation in cultural     Acc: Access to cultural eventsS
events
Relationship with peers       Acc: CIM increasing access to friendsA; isolationS
Intr: Desirable attribute of travelCF,Int; walking as a

time for interactionCF,Int; CIM as an occasion for
peer interactionCF,Int; social interaction is desirable
during travelCF,INT, social interaction is associated
with walkingCF,INT;
Ext: traffic limited play and social interactionCF,INT;
Social skills                 Intr: Learning from community observation while

travellingS;
Ext: supervised play in low densityCF,INT
Social support                Intr: Social capital is increased with CIMA;
community relations positively linked to walkingA;
community incidental interactions higher for

walkingA; public space useS

R = review; S = suggested; CF = consistent findings; IF = inconsistent findings;
A = anecdotal; Int = International.



Numerous examples can again be found of one-off relationships

(6), though for this domain, there was more consistency with find-

ings (7).


4.5. Economic

In the review by Pollard and Lee (2003), the economic domain
of well-being lists only child support as a measure. For transport,
this could be interpreted as caregivers providing time and money
to facilitate access to opportunities, or it could be interpreted as
how the transport system supports (or limits) children’s mobility
and access. As such, independent travel (travel not demanding sig-
nificant parental time) is included in this section. The issues of par-
ental time loss were also raised by Hillman et al. (1990) in their
seminal work on children’s independent travel. Parental time loss
due to chauffeuring and CIM are not mutually exclusive, as a highly
autonomous child may still need to be chauffeured for certain trips,
thus the two are treated separately. Most of the articles relating to
this domain focused on identifying what measures were associated
with CIM. As the focus of this review is on what evidence is there
that transport influences child well-being, only a summary of a
previous review on that area is given. Before that, relevant papers
on children and parental time are introduced.

4.5.1. Transport as access
A study that highlighted the differences between the mother’s
involvement in children’s transport in a transit-oriented develop-
ment (TOD) in comparison with auto-oriented development, found
that the type of trips with parental accompaniment were typically
family-oriented in the TOD area, as opposed to many more chauf-
feuring (serve-child) trips in the car-oriented one (Waygood,
2009). This is likely related to findings on differences between
mothers with independent children who practiced more personal
leisure than mothers who had to chauffeur children and sacrificed
their own leisure time to do so (Mattsson, 2002).
Likely related to the reduced burden on parents, benefits from
active travel, and other potential benefits, sufficient research has
been carried out on explaining CIM. The consistent findings
reported in Mitra’s (2013) review for transport as access are:
chauffeuring increased if parents viewed driving as convenient

E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
and socially acceptable; reduced distances to destinations were
positively associated with increased CIM. Mitra (ibid) also reported

findings on active school travel as a proxy for CIM, but those are
not reported here as the focus of this section is purely on studies
that examined CIM directly.
Consistent: chauffeuring increased if parents viewed driving as
convenient and socially acceptable; reduced distances to destina-

tions and increased CIM.


4.5.2. Intrinsic influences through transport
As mentioned above, independent travel is positively linked
with a number of child well-being domains such as social (social
connections and interactions), physical (access to physical play
and active transport), cognitive (exploration and play), and eco-
nomic (reducing time burden on parents). Autonomy is itself a mea-
sure of psychological well-being and experiencing while travelling
autonomously were positively (and consistently) associated with
increased travel satisfaction.
The study that highlighted the differences between the
mother’s involvement in children’s transport in a transit-oriented
development (TOD) in comparison with auto-oriented develop-
ment, found that mothers in the TOD-based metropolitan area
spent around fifteen minutes a day travelling with children, versus
the more than one hour in the other (Waygood, 2009). This would
suggest a considerable larger time cost on the parents.
In Mitra’s review (Mitra, 2013), the consistent relationships
found for the intrinsic impacts from CIM were: parents who
acknowledged the importance of active travel and the child’s social
interaction.
Consistent: parents who acknowledged the importance of active
travel and the child’s social interaction.


4.5.3. External influences of transport
In a study on raising children that were under five years old in
outer suburbs of cities in Australia (Andrews, 2010), many difficul-
ties such as the limited transport choices due to the built environ-
ment, and little possibility of walking or cycling to school,
increased the demands on the parents’ available time. However,
these problems were not seen as a barrier to living in such areas.
In Mitra’s review (Mitra, 2013), the external impacts of trans-
port on CIM were: parental confidence in the child’s road safety
skills; increased age of child was associated to an increase in
CIM; concern over traffic or personal safety decreased CIM.
Consistent: parental confidence in the child’s road safety skills;
increased age of child and increased CIM; concern over traffic or
personal safety decreases CIM.


4.5.4. Summary of economic domain
An argument could be made that external impacts due to traffic
(e.g. crashes, asthma, etc.) could have economic implications for
the child’s family. The distraction or stress from traffic noise may
lower the child’s school performance, which may have implications
for their future economic success. However, no papers were found
during this process that quantified those issues.
As in other sections, the results are limited to the influence of
transport on the measure. Therefore, many of the consistent find-
ings in Mitra (2013) are not given here, as they relate to explaining
CIM from other perspectives (e.g. social norms and values or indi-
vidual attributes (e.g. age)). For the economic domain the consis-
tent findings of transport on well-being were: chauffeuring
burden is higher in car-oriented development; child’s road safety
skills (related to transport context); concern over traffic and lower
CIM (Table 5).
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                                       41
Table 5
Relevant measures of economic well-being and their associations with transport
(Acc = access; Intr = intrinsic; Ext = External).

Measure                  Relationships where found
Child support            Acc: Reduce parents time burden through CIMR,CF,Int;
Intr: cost of supporting children’s travelS;
Ext: Car-based travel increases serve-passenger tripsA;
costs incurred due to traffic impacts on well-beingS

R = review; S = suggested; CF = consistent findings; IF = inconsistent findings;
A = anecdotal, Int = International.


5. Overall summary and discussion

This review aimed to answer the question: ‘‘what evidence is
there that transport affects child well-being more holistically?”
The results demonstrate that for all domains of well-being there
were consistent (e.g. corroborated) results, and for nearly all
domains by each transport means-of-influence. Thus, it can be rea-
sonably stated that evidence exists for a role of transport on each
domain of child well-being.
It should be noted that although consistent findings were iden-
tified, it cannot be stated that transport is always the cause of the
effect. A clear next step would be to examine the literature with
consistent results and ask what type of interaction has been found:
correlation or causation.
The influences of the results are organised by the transport
means-of-influence on the children’s well-being in Figs. 2–4. For
the transport means-of-influence of access, there were six consis-
tent findings across four (out of five) domains of well-being
(Fig. 2). The one exception being the psychological well-being
domain. One finding was inconsistent (whether travel with parents
for social activities is appreciated or resented is unclear). In total,
there were three reviews (two in physical, one in economic) and
27 unique papers that dealt with access.
For transport means-of-influences on well-being during travel
(e.g. intrinsic), all of the domains had at least one consistent result
(Fig. 3), although here there were three inconsistent findings (AT’s
relationship with obesity is unclear; the relationship between
mode and affect is unclear; better spatial maps and greater spatial
knowledge by mode is unclear). In total, there were 46 papers that
dealt with impacts during travel.
For transport means-of-influence as an external influence
(Fig. 4), the cognitive domain is the only one without a consistent
finding. There were no inconsistent findings. In total, there were 35
papers that dealt with the external impacts of transport on
children.
There were four inconsistent findings: weight status and active
travel; better spatial mapping by mode, and environmental (one’s
surroundings as opposed to ecological) knowledge with mode; and
affective relationships with modes. The possible reasons for these
were discussed above. Further research on these, with considera-
tion to the possible reasons for the differences mentioned, would
help clarify whether the influence of transport is consistent,
whether it is highly context dependent, or merely a statistical
coincidence.
The majority of the studies used quantitative analysis (51), with
19 using qualitative, and 12 using mixed methods. The remaining
papers were reviews of different types. Not all impacts are easily
quantifiable, nor are all impacts known. Qualitative research helps
to identify such relationships, which can later be measured in
quantitative research. The mixed method studies should be com-
mended for their efforts to quantify measures, but also remain
open to less tangible qualities of travel. Advantages and disadvan-
tages of different methods will remain, but the balance found here
suggests that neither method is particularly dominant.

42                                           E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
Fig. 2. The consistent findings of
Fig. 3. The consistent findings of intri
In relation to different methods, there was considerable varia-
tion in sample size from under 10 participants to nearly 700,000
hospital incidences. The majority of studies were relatively small
with 41 having under 250 respondents (18 fell in the 100–249
range, followed by 16 studies with 10–49, four between 50 and
99, and only three had under 10 participants). Nine papers had
between 250 and 499 participants, seven between 500 and 999,
and 16 had at least 1000 participants. Depending on the research
questions, the high number of papers with under 250 respondents
may result in anecdotal results that are not generalizable. How-
ever, small studies may have the advantage of allowing for greater
innovation and testing before being applied on larger scale
projects.
The relationship between what transport options are possible
for children are not only dependent on the child, but also their
household, neighbourhood, city, and cultural context (e.g.
Matthews and Limb, 1999). Previous reviews looked at what
explains active travel to school (Sirard and Slater, 2008) or CIM
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49
transport as access on child well-being.
nsic transport relations for child well-being.
(Mitra, 2013), but as has been pointed out, differences exist
between countries, not just the built environment, but also culture
(Waygood et al., 2015; Waygood and Kitamura, 2009; Waygood,
2009). It was for this reason that it was important to identify con-
sistent findings across cultures. In our reviewed papers, 49 relate to
only Anglo-Saxon countries. Consistent findings across divergent
cultures would imply more universally consistent results. For most
of the consistent findings reported here, the findings were from
different countries. The exceptions were papers examining post-
crash psychological impacts (UK).
Of course, considering the results of this review, next steps
would also be to question the approach of transport planning. As
mentioned in the introduction, the focus of transport planning gen-
erally relates to value of time which represents roughly 80% of
cost-benefit analysis (e.g. Mackie and Nellthorp, 2001) with some
consideration to crash potential. Related to crash potential is the
speed at which vehicles travel (e.g. Ewing and Dumbaugh, 2009).
Congestion costs are based on speeds being diminished from free

E.O.D. Waygood et al. / T
Fig. 4. The consistent findings
flow speeds (occasionally with some lowering of this in the calcu-
lations) (e.g. Canada, 2006; Goodwin, 2004). From the results pre-
sented here, considerable negative impacts are incurred by
children through this promotion of high speed and high volume
traffic. As previously written, transport planning in many contexts
may assume that providing for adults (and thus parents) is provid-
ing for children (Davis and Jones, 1996; Matthews and Limb, 1999;
Gilbert and O’Brien, 2005). That assumption is not necessarily true
as much of children’s travel will be local and for independent tra-
vel, consideration to active travel and public transport is likely
more important than focusing on congestion and value of time.
All of those articles (Davis and Jones, 1996; Matthews and Limb,
1999; Gilbert and O’Brien, 2005) argue that the values of adults
(congestion and value of time) are imposed upon the (mobility)
needs of children, to their detriment. This makes children a ‘‘so-
ciospatial marginalized group” (Matthews and Limb, 1999). Davis
and Jones (1996) make a similar point, arguing that rather than
modifying the built environment, children are forced to make the
behavioural modifications to fit within the adult world. An exam-
ple that they give is where parents (society) teach children to be
fearful and careful of traffic, rather than treating the problem by
limiting traffic’s negative impacts. Certainly it is important for chil-
dren to understand the danger traffic poses, but it is also important
for planning to treat the source of the problem.
From a transport perspective, children differ from adults in a
number of important ways. Matthews and Limb (1999) outline
six major distinctions: 1) rhythms of time and space are different;
2) use of land and facilities are different; 3) CIM is restricted due to
money, physical capabilities, caretaking conventions, etc.; 4)
threats are different (e.g. with air quality); 5) even given the same
environment, interpretation and perceptions are different; and 6)
they are unable to influence decision-makers. The review carried
out here better supports a number of these points from a perspec-
tive of child well-being. It demonstrates that children suffer signif-
icant well-being impacts due to traffic, that how they view and
value transport is not related to congestion and rapid access, and
the focus on such adult values is often at the loss of their CIM. It
gives further weight to arguments made over twenty years ago
on the need for a public health perspective when considering
transport and children (Davis and Jones, 1996).
ravel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                          43
of external transport relations child well-being.
There are limitations to this review. The search terms did not
include synonyms of child(ren) such as baby, infant, youth, adoles-
cent, young adult, etc. As well, mode-specific terms were not used
such as pedestrian, cyclist, driver, etc. An effort to find related find-
ings to each one-off result was not made, and it is certainly possi-
ble that relevant literature exists. The challenge is to take this first
such review and continue refining and developing knowledge so
that individual decisions, policy, and planning can best support
child well-being. Not all relevant articles will have been found as
relevant papers may not specifically use the search words applied
in their title or abstract. As with all such reviews, the impact of
publication bias likely exists. Research that examined a relation,
but did not find a statistical association is less likely to be pub-
lished or even submitted.

5.1. Directions for future research

Very few papers crossed well-being domain boundaries. The
exceptions can be seen in Table 6. Thus, very little research has
examined more holistic impacts on child well-being and research
that aims to examine potentially conflicting impacts would
improve planning.
Transport as access relates to the benefits derived from the
activity at the destination. Research questions here would need
to examine how different travel options and modes relate to access
by children to different types of activities that would have an
impact on their well-being (whether positive or negative). The des-
tination’s activity is important for physical (Page et al., 2010), psy-
chological (Barker, 2006), cognitive (e.g. reaching school (Sirard
and Slater, 2008), social (Lim and Barton, 2010), and economic
(Mitra, 2013) domains. However, the focus has primarily been on
school trips, ignoring other destinations that may contribute to
the domains of well-being. Although reviews can be cited here
for physical activity, reaching school, or independent travel, insuf-
ficient work has examined the psychological relationships for trans-
port as access. For that domain, two one-off studies (Barker,
2006; Pacilli et al., 2013) found relationships that could be fol-
lowed up on. The findings relating CIM to both physical activity
and social interaction may well be related: children who can freely
access their friends and play, perform both. It would not be a

E.O.D. Waygood et al. / Travel
Table 6 (continued)
Citation         Wellbeing      Transport   Location        Children’s ages
domain         relation                    (years)
Fuhrer and       Social         Access      Switzerland     10 to 14
Quaiser-
Pohl (1999)
Weller and       Social         Intrinsic   England         11 to 14
Bruegel
(2009)
Waygood and      Social         Access;     Japan           10,11
Kitamura                     Intrinsic
(2009)
Waygood et al.   Social         Intrinsic   Japan           10,11
(2015)
Whitehead-       Social         Intrinsic   Canada,         9 to 12
Frei and                                 Japan,
Kockelman                                Sweden
(2010)
Andrews          Social         Access      USA             Parents with
(2010)                                                   children under
18
Holt et al.      Social,        Access      Australia       <5
(2008)        economic
Morrow           Social         Access,     Canada          6 to 12
(1999)                       Intrinsic
Mattsson         Economic       Access      Sweden          7 to 17
(2002)


Mackie and       Economic       Access      Japan           10, 11
Nellthorp
(2001)
Ewing and        Physical       External    New Zealand     10
Dumbaugh
(2009)
stretch to suggest that this would likely have psychological
benefits.
For intrinsic relationships between transport and child well-
being, it is perhaps more obvious, or easier, to relate active travel
to physical health (Schoeppe et al., 2013). However, consistent
findings here suggest that further benefits may be found in travel
that relate to psychological (Murray and Mand, 2013; Zwerts
et al., 2010), cognitive (Hosoda and Nichide, 2009; Kullman,
2010), and social (Westman et al., 2015; Romero, 2010) domains.
In many cases, active travel and CIM allows the children to social-
ize (related to trips that children rate as higher quality), to explore,
observe and experience their environment. Is the focus on speed

and value of time potentially reducing these benefits? It’s hard to

stop and observe a ladybug and create some imaginary story
around them if one is rushing along. Children might be viewed

as tourists: they want to experience the (new) world around them,
and enjoy it with friends. Although consistent, it is only the intrinsic
physical well-being benefits that have been sufficiently explored to

have warranted a review focused on that specific relationship.
Numerous impacts due to external impacts were found which
related to physical (e.g. crashes, leukaemia, asthma, blood pres-
sure), psychological (stress, anxiety, annoyance), cognitive (atten-

tion and academic performance), social (barrier to social

interaction), and economic (traffic danger increasing the use of
costlier means of transport) domains. Here, the cognitive impacts
are less well studied with consistent findings and reviews existing
for nearly all the other domains of well-being.

It is likely that there exist other relations to the problem of traf-
fic danger as a limiting factor on CIM and the level of children’s
road skills required (e.g. how well do they cope with traffic dan-
ger). In a situation of no road danger, a child would not need road

skills, but as road danger increases, so does the need to have

increased safety skills. Paraphrasing a question posed by Hillman
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 32–49                                                47

N                   Data source                        Method type

184                 One-week activity diaries          Quantitative


588                 Questionnaire, interviews, focus   Mixed
groups. activity sheets

264                 Questionnaire                      Quantitative


425                 Questionnaire                      Quantitative

499                 Questionnaire                      Quantitative



12248               American Time Use Questionnaire    Quantitative
(ATUS)

15                  In-depth interviews with mother    Qualitative

168                 Mental mapping                     Qualitative

40 households       Travel diary for each family       Mixed
member and semi-structured
interviews to a subsample about
chauffeuring habits
491                 Questionnaire, published articles  Quantitative


1                   Traffic accident report            Qualitative


et al. (1990): why is it the child who is burdened with the respon-
sibility of road safety when they are not the ones creating it? Obvi-
ously, some skills are required, but the question is perhaps to what
extent should the emphasis be on the victims (Davis and Jones,
1996; Roberts and Coggan, 1982)?
Considering the application of the findings presented here,
there are a number of future directions. One would be to further
develop the consistent findings to be incorporated into health
impact assessments, whether this be through a monetization of
those costs and benefits, or an assessment of morbidity or mortal-


Table 7

Suggested relationships between transport and child well-being that were not
evident in this review.

Domain           Measure                         Explanation

Physical         Physical structure (bone,       Related to walking
muscle)
Physical         Digestion                       Related to walking
Physical         Vitamin E                       Related to active travel
and public transport
Physical         Personal security               Exposure to others
Psychological    Restorative                     Walking in restorative
environments

Psychosocial     Place attachment                Local travel
Psychological    Life satisfaction               Access to needs,
achievement, autonomy
Social           Parent-child interaction        During travel (positive,
negative, type, etc.)
Social           Access to cultural events       Access-related
Social           Isolation                       Access and autonomy
Social           Learning social skills and      Local travel and
behaviour through observation   autonomy
Cognitive        Cognitive requirements          Safety related
Economic         Costs of supporting children’s  Costs vary by mode,

travel                          distance, needs, etc.

