

Spatial Analysis of Propensity to Escort
Children to School in Southern California
Seo Youn Yoon, Marjorie Doudnikoff, and Konstadinos G. Goulias
The spatial distribution of children’s school commute behavior is ana-
lyzed from three perspectives: commuting to school independently of
parents, commuting to school by active modes, and allocation of escort-
ing tasks for children between mothers and fathers. Accessibility mea-
sures and population density are introduced in the propensity regression
models to account for the impact of spatial characteristics around school
locations and to identify the spatial distribution of behavioral patterns.
The results from the models are presented as maps combining the
impacts of all the significant spatial variables to display the spatial pat-
terns of behavior and intrahousehold interaction. These patterns can
identify and pinpoint the impact of barriers, with the paper offering the
example of the negative impact of a park area in the middle of the city
of Los Angeles, California, on children’s independent and active com-
mutes to school. Similarly, barriers create significantly different intra-
household interaction patterns at different locations in the region. The
results of this study show that an opportunity exists to expand the micro-
analysis to a more comprehensive treatment of travel behavior in space
and to contribute to the development of models integrating land use and
transportation.


This paper analyzes the propensity to escort children to school, which
can be interpreted as parents being protective about children and
as children being dependent on parents for travel. Analysis of chil-
dren’s dependence on their parents is important in many contexts.
In previous studies on the household interaction in time use, chil-
dren’s time use patterns had a substantial impact on their parents’
activity participation and travel (1). Children’s out-of-home activi-
ties become spatiotemporal constraints for their parents, especially
when the parents must chauffeur their children. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to find the interaction patterns in escorting children to school
because escorting children to school is concentrated at specific times
during a day and brings significant changes in the tours that parents
make in the morning.
Moreover, these parental duties are, in general, inflicted differ-
ently on fathers and mothers. For example, the household travel
survey conducted by the Southern California Association of Govern-
ments (SCAG) in 2001 found that mothers provided a large propor-
tion (75.3%) of chauffeuring for children and that fathers provided a


S. Y. Yoon and K. G. Goulias, GeoTrans Laboratory, Department of Geography,

University of California, Santa Barbara, 1832 Ellison Hall, Santa Barbara,
CA 93106-4060. M. Doudnikoff, Ecole Nationale des Travaux Publics de l’Etat,
3 Rue Maurice Audin, 69518 Vaulx-en-Velin CEDEX, France. Corresponding
author: S. Y. Yoon, yoon@geog.ucsb.edu.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 2230, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,

D.C., 2011, pp. 132–142.
DOI: 10.3141/2230-15




much smaller proportion (24.7%). This asymmetric allocation of
parental duties results in different levels of constraints and has dif-
ferent impacts for certain arrangements in households on parents’
time use, resource allocation, and travel patterns.
Children’s travel modes to school have been viewed from many
different perspectives. Generally, promotion of active modes as chil-
dren’s travel modes to school is expected to combat childhood obe-
sity (2) and to improve children’s overall well-being (3). The built
environment has been considered one of the important factors affect-
ing children’s travel mode to school, and the relationship between
children’s school travel and the built environment has been addressed
by the existing literature (4–7). Another facet of children’s commut-
ing behavior is interaction with parents. Chauffeuring children to
school is viewed as a parental decision according to their socioeco-
nomic characteristics (8), and allocation of chauffeuring between
mother and father has also been addressed (9–11). Sidharthan et al.
focused on the impact of spatial and social interactions in the neigh-
borhood and found that the interaction in the neighborhood has a
significant impact on the decision on children’s travel mode to
school (12). On the basis of this result, they suggested public policies
targeting the local neighborhood level.
In this context, a spatial analysis that links spatial variables around
school locations and different aspects of children’s commuting
behavior is proposed, and the geographic patterns of the impact are
shown as propensity maps. Children’s commuting behavior patterns
that were evaluated were (a) commuting to school independently of
parents, (b) commuting to school by active modes (walking and bik-
ing), and (c) allocation of escorting tasks for children between the
mother and father. To find the characteristics of school location and
their spatial patterns, accessibility indicators at school location are
introduced as explanatory variables of the models. This study extends
the methodology of the exploratory accessibility study conducted by
the GeoTrans Laboratory for the entire state of California (13) and
augments the study by performing more a sophisticated spatial
analysis that includes intrahousehold interaction ideas.
Several different strategies have been used in travel behavior
research to model intrahousehold interactions. The methodologies
used include modeling with structural equation models (1, 14, 15)
and structural discrete choice models (16) and the use of genetic
algorithms (17), household utility maximization (18–22), and latent
class cluster analysis (23). Acknowledging that modeling method-

ologies that include all the interacting household members and col-

lective interaction facets provide a comprehensive framework for
intrahousehold interaction, the scope of the intrahousehold interac-
tion was kept simple to emphasize the intrahousehold interaction
only in relation to spatial characteristics of the school location(s).


Specific aspects of the dependence of children on their parents in
commuting behavior that are listed above are evaluated, and binary
logit models for the behavioral patterns of children’s commute to
132

Yoon, Doudnikoff, and Goulias
school are used. Finally, the results are displayed as spatial patterns
by use of geographic information system (GIS) maps.


DATA USED

This study uses the 2001 postcensus travel survey conducted for
SCAG. This region includes the six California counties of Los
Angeles, Orange, Imperial, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura.
The purpose of the survey is to document household characteristics
and travel behavior and to update the regional computerized travel
forecasting model. This large-scale study of regional travel aims at
providing a foundation for long-term transportation planning deci-
sions in the region. A total of 16,939 households completed the
travel diaries and socioeconomic characteristics survey, and the
information was retrieved from all household members.
Of the approximately 40,000 people from the sample, 3,483 chil-
dren under 16 years old went to school, preschool, or day care (here-
after collectively referred to as “school”) on the survey day. The
sociodemographic information for the children and families is sum-
marized in Table 1, and the children’s mode choice to school and the
split of escorting children between father and mother are summa-
rized in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. About 50% of the children
(1,794) were escorted to school by their parents, and the split of
escorting between fathers and mothers was 443 and 1,351, respec-
tively. About 23.1% of the children traveled to school by active modes
(walking and biking).



TABLE 1     Summary of Sample
Characteristic                             Frequency       Percent


Total number of children under age 16         3,483         100
who went to school
Age (years)
0–4                                           258           7.4
5–10                                        1,854          53.2

11–15                                       1,371          39.4
Parents’ employment status
Both parents full-time workers                875          25.1
Father full-time, mother part-time            299           8.6
Father full-time, mother not employed         917          26.3
Employed single father                        172           4.9
Not employed single father                     28           0.8
Employed single mother                        457          13.1
Not employed single mother                    242           6.9
Other                                         493          14.1
Household income ($)
Less than 10,000                              188           5.4
10,000–24,999                                 645          18.5
25,000–34,999                                 468          13.4
35,000–49,999                                 424          12.2
50,000–74,999                                 670          19.2
75,000–99,999                                 418          12.0
100,000–149,000                               265           7.6
150,000 or more                               186           5.3
Unknown                                       219           6.3
Child’s ethnicity
White, not Hispanic                         1,285          36.9
Hispanic                                    1,377          39.5
African American                              203           5.8
Asian, Pacific Islander                        92           2.6
Other                                         198           5.7
Unknown                                       328           9.4
133
TABLE 2     Children’s Travel Mode to School

Travel Mode to School              Frequency       Percent
Walk                                    741           21.3

Bicycle                                  63            1.8
Passenger in car, truck, van          2,197           63.1
School bus                              364           10.5
Transit                                  29             .8
Other or unknown                         89            2.6
Total                                 3,483         100.0



The network data used for this paper (from the Dynamap/
Transportation database by TeleAtlas) contains detailed information
on the road network across the entire state of California. It includes
the type of road network, segment length, and speed limit for each
segment; turn restrictions; and one-way streets, enabling the realis-
tic representation of transportation facilities. Not included in these
network data, however, is information on the public transportation
network. The total length of each network type in a block group was
considered an indicator of the amount of available transportation
facilities of each type in each block group.
The six counties included in the SCAG region were divided into
10,631 zones by use of 2000 U.S. census block groups. The number of
employees reported by the Census Transportation Planning Package
was counted for each block group by using the 14 industry types clas-
sified by the North American Industry Classification System. These
numbers were used as the relative amount of opportunity to participate
in the related types of activities (i.e., the number of employees in the

retail industry represents the opportunity to participate in shopping
activities). This analysis uses the number of employees in the retail
industry only as an accessibility indicator to describe different levels
of mix of residence and retail businesses in each block group.



MEASUREMENT OF ACCESSIBILITY

Although the computation of accessibility covers the entire state of

California, this paper considers only the 10,631 block groups in the
SCAG region. However, for the borders of the SCAG region, block



TABLE 3 Allocation of Escort Between Father and
Mother by Household Type

Total
Household Type by Parents             Escort by      Escort by    Number of
Composition                           Father         Mother       Children

Both parents full-time workers            151            373          875
Father full-time, mother part-time         41            152          299

Father full-time, mother not              106            374          917
employed
Father and mother with other               96            157          493
employment combination
Single father                              49              0          200
Employed single mother                       0           204          457

Not employed single mother                   0            91          242
Total                                     443          1,351        3,483

134
groups outside the region that are accessible from the origin block
group are also included. Each block group was treated as a traffic
analysis zone, and each block group centroid was attached to the
nearest node in the Dynamap/Transportation network data set, which
contains the entire spectrum of roadways in California, from local
roads to Interstate freeways, which follows the classification of
TIGER/Line File Census Feature Class Codes. A travel time
between each pair of origins and destinations was computed on the
basis of Dijkstra’s algorithm (24) by use of the ArcGIS Network
Analyst program. For this computation, the assumption was made
that all the trips between the origins and the destinations are made at
the speed limit of each network segment. After the travel time com-
putation, an accessible buffer can be defined for each block group by
using a threshold of travel time. The time threshold of 20 min was
used to find the local accessibility of each block group. This thresh-
old is based on the travel time to school reported in the sample. It took
14.23 min, on average, for the children in the sample to go to school
by walking [standard deviation (SD) = 11.27]; 13.39 min, on aver-
age, by bike (SD = 7.37); and 11.85 min, on average, by car (as a pas-
senger; SD = 11.76). Therefore, the buffer area of 20 min by car
represents the approximate catchment area of each school.
Accessibility measures for each buffer area were then computed by
summing the accessibility indicators of the block groups that belong
to a buffer area. The accessibility measures considered here are
• Number of retail employees within a travel time of 20 min and
• Total number of segment kilometers by the following network
types within a travel time of 20 min:
– Primary highways with limited access (Type 1),
– Primary roadways without limited access (Type 2),
– Secondary and connecting roadways (Type 3),
– Local and rural roads (Type 4),
– Vehicular trail (Type 5),
– Roads with special characteristics (Type 6), and
– All other roadways (Type 7).

However, some of the accessibility measures showed high degrees
of correlation with each other, which leads to redundancy in travel
behavior models. Some of the accessibility measures were selec-
tively excluded on the basis of the correlation matrix, and the num-
ber of accessibility measures included was managed to be minimal
and not redundant. The accessibility measures for network Types
3, 4, and 6 were excluded because of their high correlation with
other accessibility measures (the correlation between Type 3 and
Type 1 is .865, the correlation between Type 4 and Type 1 is .872,
and the correlation between Type 6 and Type 1 is .947). Type 7 was
excluded because it was not found to be an informative functional
class.
The accessibility measures that were finally included in the behav-
ioral models are (a) the number of retail employees within a travel
time of 20 min and (b) the total number of segment kilometers of a
Type 1, 2, and 5 network within a travel time of 20 min.
In addition to the four accessibility measures, the population den-
sity of each block group is included as a proxy of residential den-
sity. Other methods of developing summaries of accessibility exist.
In fact, the coarse spatial resolution obtained with census block
groups can be rectified by use of a school-by-school analysis that
also includes mode-specific accessibility measures computed with
a mode-specific travel time and network with a finer spatial resolu-
tion on the basis of the alternatives available for each individual. All
these are left as future tasks.
Transportation Research Record 2230
MODELS AND RESULTS

General Description of Models

Three behavioral models are estimated to analyze different aspects of
children’s commute to school. In each of the models, explanatory vari-
ables are tested in two blocks: (a) the set of sociodemographic vari-
ables and (b) the set of spatial variables used to explore the significance
of spatial variables’ contribution. The models are

1. Model INDEPENDENT: a binary logit model for children’s
independent commute to school. The variable analyzed takes the
value of 1 if the child goes to school without a parent(s) escort and
0 otherwise.
2. Model ACTIVE: a binary logit model for children’s active
commute to school by walking or biking. The variable analyzed
takes the value of 1 if the child goes to school by walking or biking
and 0 otherwise.
3. Model FATHER’S ESCORT: a binary logit model for allocat-
ing escort of the children to the father. The variable analyzed takes
the value of 1 if the child goes to school with the father and 0 if the
child goes to school with the mother. This model is estimated only
for children who are from households headed by a couple and who
went to school with their parents.
The model INDEPENDENT uses two sets of explanatory vari-
ables, as explained above, to test if any sociodemographic groups
are significantly more or less likely to let children travel indepen-
dently and if any spatial variables have significant impacts on chil-
dren’s independent commute to school and alleviation of parents’
obligation to take their children to school.
With the model ACTIVE, a more specific type of children’s inde-
pendent travel is tested. This model focuses on an independent and
active commute to school and the impact of spatial variables on this.
The hypothesis of this model is that by having walkable or bikable
environments around school locations, children can more easily be
independent of their parents, after the impact of sociodemographics
are accounted for. This model also addresses the possibility of reliev-
ing the parents of their duties of escorting their children by providing
certain types of environments that enable children’s active travel.
Last, in the model FATHER’S ESCORT, only the children in
households headed by a couple who were escorted by their parents
(n = 1,328) are included. This model addresses allocation of the
parental duty of escorting children to school between the father and
mother to see if the bargaining between the father and mother on
escorting their children has a geographic pattern.
The purpose of including spatial variables as explanatory vari-
ables in the models is to find specific areas that have a significant
association with any of the three commuting patterns. Modeling of
the contribution of spatial variables was complicated by the pres-
ence of spikes at zero and long positive tails in their distribution.
For example, some rural block groups in Southern California are
extremely large but have very small populations and very few retail
employees and a road network accessible within a 20-min travel
time. In contrast, some other block groups in the center of the city
of Los Angeles are extremely dense in population or have very high
levels of accessibility to retail businesses and road networks. These
block groups need to be modeled together, and this makes it diffi-
cult to find specific areas that have significant meaning to each of
the behavioral patterns of interest in this paper. To overcome this
distributional heterogeneity, each of the accessibility measures and

Yoon, Doudnikoff, and Goulias
the population density, which are either a continuous variable (total
segment length by network type and population density) or a count
variable (number of employees), are reclassified into a discrete vari-
able that has 10 even classes. Each of the 10 classes represents one
decile in the distribution of the variable. This transformation relieves
the estimation bias caused by outlying observations and makes it eas-
ier to find specific areas that are significant. The transformation also
facilitates estimation in which the spatial variables can contribute
nonlinear and even nonordinal effects. This methodology is emerg-
ing from a previous statewide exploratory analysis for California cor-
relating land use density, infrastructure supply, and travel behavior
(13). Figure 1 shows the spatial distributions of the discretized
accessibility variables over the SCAG region.


Contribution of Spatial Variables

The results of omnibus tests of each set of variables are given in
Table 4. The data in Table 4 provide an idea of how much the spa-
tial variables improve each of the models over the same models with
only sociodemographic variables.
The increments of chi-square and Nagelkerke R2 both by ratio and
by difference are the least affected by the spatial variables in the
model INDEPENDENT. This result indicates that the sociodemo-
graphic characteristics of the children and their families have more
importance in determining whether the children are going to travel
to school independently. This result also implies that although spa-
tial variables have a significant relationship with children’s indepen-
dent travel to school, it might be harder to change children’s commute
patterns by changing just land use and accessibility in the vicinity of
schools.
The story is different for the model ACTIVE, which shows much
improvement in its goodness of fit when spatial variables are included
in the model. This improvement indicates that children’s indepen-
dent travel by active modes is more related to the population density
and accessibility than children’s independent travel by any other mode.
This finding suggests that the active modes must be addressed sepa-
rately when children’s independent traveling is to be addressed, and
spatial variables should not be missed when children’s active modes
are to be analyzed.
The goodness of fit of the model FATHER’S ESCORT is improved
the most by ratio when the spatial variables are added. The spatial
variables contribute about 75% of the chi-square value that socio-
demographic variables contributed to the goodness of fit. This finding
implies that a geographic pattern in allocating an escort for children
between fathers and mothers likely exists.


Impact of Sociodemographic Variables

Estimated coefficients of the three models are shown in Table 5. To
aid in interpretation, only statistically significant (p = .05) and mar-
ginally significant (.05 < p = .1) coefficients are listed. The coeffi-
cients are shown as both raw coefficients and odds ratios, and the
t-statistic of each coefficient is listed as well.
In both the model INDEPENDENT and the model ACTIVE, the
age of the child displays a significant impact. Younger children are
less likely to travel independently to school and less likely to travel
by active modes, as expected. The gender of the child was signifi-
cant in the model ACTIVE and marginally significant in the model
INDEPENDENT, which means that girls are less likely than boys
135
to go to school independently of their parents and to use active
modes when parents do not escort them to school. Ethnicity has a
significant impact on both traveling independently of parents and
traveling by active modes. Among all the ethnicity groups, African
American children were the most likely to go to school independently
and to walk or bike to school, and children who did provide their eth-
nicity information are more likely (with a marginal significance) than
white children to go to school independently.
Children of households with annual incomes of more than
$100,000 and less than $150,000 are less likely to travel indepen-
dently than the baseline (the children of households with annual
incomes of more than $50,000 and less than $75,000), which
implies that higher income (or, presumably, wealth) encourages par-
ents to be protective about their children’s commute to school. Chil-
dren of households with annual incomes of more than $10,000 and
less than $50,000 are more likely to walk or bike than the baseline
(1.391 to 1.430 times the baseline propensity), which might mean
either that those households are intentionally selecting a school loca-
tion in a walkable area or that the children are unavoidably walking
or biking to school regardless of school locations and the walkabil-
ity or bikability of the neighborhood around the school locations.
The number of siblings under 18 years old has a positive impact on
both independent and active commuting. This result shows that par-
ents with four or more children are constrained in their ability to pro-
vide a ride for each of their children in the morning or that they
might be making location choices that enable their children to walk
or bike to school. Among different parent types, single fathers and
single mothers behave in significantly different ways than other par-
ents. Single fathers are more likely to let their children commute to
school independently, but single mothers are less likely to let their
children walk or bike to school. Children living with single fathers
or single mothers seem to face quite different choices in their travel
mode to school.
The numbers of hours that the parents work per week and work
location were included in the models as proxies of spatiotemporal
constraints in their activity participation and travel. The father’s
work hours and work location do not have significant impacts in
these two models, but the mother’s work hours and work location
have significant impacts. When mothers work more than 40 hours
and less than 50 hours per week, children are significantly more
likely to go to school independently (1.550 times the baseline) and
actively (1.611 times the baseline) than they are when mothers work
less than 40 hours per week. When mothers work more than 50 hours
and less than 60 hours per week, children are less likely (with a
marginal significance) to go to school independently. However, the
latter impact should be considered carefully because mothers worked
more than 50 hours and less than 60 hours per week in only 30 cases.
When mothers work at various locations, children are more likely
to go to school independently. When mothers work at home or did
not answer the work location question, children are more likely to
go to school using active modes. This result shows that the impact
of parents’ spatiotemporal constraints on determining children’s
travel mode to school is asymmetric between the father and the
mother.
In the model FATHER’S ESCORT, both parents’ employment
status, work hours, and work locations have significant impacts. In
households headed by couples, fathers are the least likely to take
children to school (0.340 time the baseline) when they are employed
full-time and their wives are employed part-time and less likely than
the baseline to take children to school when they and their wives are
employed full-time (0.542 time the baseline). Fathers’ long work

Yoon, Doudnikoff, and Goulias
TABLE 4     Goodness of Fit
Contribution of Set
Degrees
Variable Set            Chi-Square       Freedom
Model INDEPENDENT
Sociodemographic          602.824            50
Spatial                    76.031            45
Model ACTIVE
Sociodemographic          435.717            50
Spatial                   157.632            45
Model FATHER’S ESCORT
Sociodemographic          119.652            46
Spatial                    90.922            45
hours (41 to 60 hours per week) have a negative impact on their
propensity to take children to school, and mothers’ long work hours
(41 to 50 hours per week) have a positive impact on fathers’ propen-
sity to take children to school, which agrees with common sense.
When fathers work at home, they are significantly more likely
to take their children to school. This finding is evidence of the very
different arrangements among parents based on wage-earning and
spatiotemporal constraints.


Spatial Patterns of Propensities

Table 5 provides coefficient estimates for spatial variables, and sev-
eral significant patterns can be observed. The results show the impact
of the different levels of accessibility fairly well, including an asym-
metric impact of low accessibility and high accessibility. One of the
cautions required in the interpretation is that each dummy variable
should be interpreted as a set of block groups that is located with a
certain amount of network availability around the respondent’s ori-
gin. For example, the 10th (highest) decile in retail accessibility has
a negative impact on both children’s independent and active com-
mutes to school. For interpretation of this impact within the spatial
context, the maps in Figure 1 need to be consulted to find out where
the 10th decile is located. This variable partially explains the locations
of regional shopping centers or downtown areas.
Another recommended caution is that each dummy variable rep-
resents one of many characteristics of the block groups that belong
to the dummy. For example, a certain block group in downtown
Los Angeles can have the highest residential density and the high-
est retail accessibility but many other network accessibility char-
acteristics, and a certain block group in Orange County can have
the 7th decile in residential density and the 6th decile in retail
accessibility but many other network accessibility characteristics.
For these reasons, the collective effects of all the characteristics
have more behavioral implications than the impact of one signifi-
cant dummy, and so the authors do not offer an explanation about
each parameter in Table 5. Instead of looking at the coefficients
separately and trying to find their implication on each behavioral
facet, the authors generated maps with composite impacts of all the
spatial variables.
The three maps in Figure 2 show the total impact of the spatial
variables in each model. A GIS layer was created for each set of
137

Cumulative Models
of                    Degrees of
Chi-Square        Freedom         Nagelkerke R2

602.824             50               .212
677.856             95               .236

435.717             50               .178
593.349             95               .237

119.652             46               .127
210.574             91               .217
dummies in a model assigning the significant coefficients to corre-
sponding block groups. The layers were then summed into one map.
The gray shades show the composite impacts of the spatial variables.
A propensity significantly lower than the baseline is coded in dark
gray shades, and a propensity significantly higher than the baseline
is coded in light gray shades, with the baseline and block groups that
are not significantly different from the baseline being medium gray.
A detailed legend is given at the bottom of Figure 2. Because most
of the variations are concentrated in Los Angeles County, Orange
County, and a small portion of both San Bernardino and Riverside
Counties, the maps show only those areas to make the interpretation
easier.
In Figure 2a, it is clear that an area with light shades extends from
the center of downtown Los Angeles, where accessibility by public
transit is better than anywhere else in the SCAG region. This map
shows a higher propensity for children’s independent commuting is
actually distributed around the facilities that enable independent
traveling. Areas with a higher propensity for children’s independent
commuting appear along the coast, in Orange County, and in the
southwestern corner of San Bernardino County. Except for those
areas, the propensity for children to commute to school independently
is almost uniform for the entire SCAG area.
Another aspect to be noted is the group of block groups with dark
shades that dissect the lightly shaded area (marked with a square
in Figure 2a). In appearance, this spatial pattern shows that for an
unknown reason, spatial discontinuity in children’s propensity to
commute to school independently exists. To verify that the map
shows the patterns that actually exist in the real world, the authors
examined a detailed map, and found that this area with darker shades
coincides with the Kenneth Hahn State Recreational Area, which
takes up about 2 mi2 in the middle of the urban area. The recre-
ational area interrupts the connectivity of the network, and it appears
to inhibit the desirable behavior for children to travel independently.
The sample cases of downtown Los Angeles and the Kenneth Hahn
State Recreational Area confirm that the method used in this study
is able to detect the patterns of children’s propensity to commute to
school independently fairly well.
Figure 2b shows the spatial distribution of the propensity of chil-
dren to commute to school using active modes. The highest propen-
sity to use active modes is evenly distributed in downtown Los
Angeles, as is the highest propensity to commute independently.
The discontinuity in the spatial distribution of the propensity to

140
TABLE 5 (continued)      Estimated Coefficients of Children’s Commuting Be
INDEPENDENT
Variable                                                     B       Sig.
Total length of vehicular trail within 20 min travel
(percentile)
<10
10th
20th
30th
Base: 40th
50th
60th
70th
80th
90th                                                      -0.401  .077
NOTE: Sig. = significance; B = ß coefficient; Exp(B) = odds ratio.
commute independently, possibly because of the Kenneth Hahn
State Recreational Area, appears in the spatial distribution of the
propensity to commute by active modes as well. These agreements
in the spatial distributions of the two propensities show a strong pos-
sibility for a causal relationship between the environment enabling
children’s active travel and their independent travel. They also pro-
vide evidence of the ability of this method to pinpoint problematic
areas for local policy action.
Figure 2c shows the spatial distribution of the propensity of
fathers to escort their children to school. Noticeable spatial patterns
can be found. These patterns consist of the rings formed around
the downtown Los Angeles area. A ring with a relatively positive
propensity (lightly shaded areas) for fathers to escort their children
to school is immediately outside the downtown area, and farther out
is another ring with a relatively negative propensity (dark shades).
The accessibility measures alone do not explain why those rings
with these specific patterns are formed. One of the most promising
approaches to finding the reason would be analyzing the school
locations in relation to the children’s home location and the destina-
tion (work location) of their fathers, which is left as a future task.
However, the spatial patterns shown on the map give an idea of the
tours that fathers and mothers make in the morning. These tours are
most likely to be significantly different around the two rings, assum-

ing that children are sent to schools that are close to home. There-

fore, this map may also indicate that the accessibility around school

locations not only affects children’s behavior when they are going to

school but also influences their parents’ behavior and the bargaining

and task allocation patterns between mothers and fathers.



CONCLUSIONS

This study analyzed three different aspects of children’s school
commute behavior. Spatial variables, including accessibility mea-
sures and population density, were introduced in regression models
to account for the impact of the spatial characteristics around school
locations. When the impact of sociodemographics is taken into
account, the results of three models showed spatial distributions of
the propensity of each behavior and intrahousehold interaction pat-
terns. The results of each model, presented as maps combining the
impact of all the significant spatial variables, are informative. These
Transportation Research Record 2230
havior Models
ACTIVE                             FATHER’S ESCORT
Exp(B)       B           Sig.      Exp(B)       B          Sig.       Exp(B)


0.849     .016       2.336






-0.719      .012       0.487

0.670

types of maps can be useful for decision makers and planners trying
to identify specific locations where certain types of investments in
local policy programs that promote specific types of behavior, such
as children’s active traveling, are needed.
As indicators of spatial characteristics influencing behavior,
accessibility measures at school locations were used as explanatory
variables in this study. However, when one makes decisions about
a trip, not only the accessibility at the destination but also the acces-
sibility in the space between and the spaces encompassing the ori-
gin and the destination are important. An alternative to the use of
location-based accessibility is the use of time–space prism accessi-
bility (25), which takes into account the origin, the destination, and
the space between them. By using time–space prism accessibility,
investigators can have accessibility measures that are more integrated
into individual schedules of activities and consider the complete
choice set of the many activity-related decisions. This procedure is
one potential future direction for new model development emerging
from this study.
The study described here tested a methodology of analyzing geo-
graphical patterns in behavior by using children’s school commute
behavior and parents’ behavior in chauffeuring their children. This
methodology was used not only to analyze individual behavior patterns

but also to find the impact of spatial characteristics on interactions

between individuals. The results of this study show an opportunity to

expand the microanalysis to a more comprehensive treatment of travel

behavior in space and to contribute to the development of models

integrating land use and transportation.

This study, however, uses data collected in 2001 and shows behav-
ioral patterns from about 10 years ago. Although a rich set of acces-
sibility measures was developed for the year 2001, many detailed

data for the development of a more in-depth analysis were simply not
available. For example, adequate spatial measures of walkability or
bikability, such as connected sidewalk and bike path networks, or
the availability of school buses at different schools, which would be
expected to have a significant impact on children’s independent or
active travel, could not be derived. However, it was found that even
with the limited information about space, children’s commute behav-
ior could be explained, and it was possible to define the data needs
for future development of this methodology. This is particularly
important for the newly designed California statewide as well as

142
SCAG household travel and add-on surveys that are going to be con-
ducted in 2011 to 2012 and for related accessibility measures that

will also be updated immediately after the survey is completed.
A final comment about the analyses that can be done with the new
data that will be available in a few years is called for. Some of the
areas in the SCAG region have gone through changes in safety,

walkability, and public transportation accessibility during the 10 years
since the data used in this study were collected, and these might have
brought about changes in behavior patterns in the urban area. In that
context, a longitudinal study of the region can be done to examine

changes in the propensities that are explored in this study with
updated accessibility measures. Those analyses can address the
causal relationship between changes in land use and facilities and
changes in behavior patterns in the region. Additionally, this type of

analysis can be conducted at the local level with better representa-
tion of the environment when more detailed spatial information is
available.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Funding for this research was provided by the Southern California
Association of Governments, the University of California Office of
the President, and the University of California Transportation Cen-
ter. Marjorie Doudnikoff’s internship at the University of California,

Santa Barbara, was supported by the Ecole Nationale des Travaux
Publics de l’Etat.


REFERENCES


1. Yoon, S. Y., and K. G. Goulias. Impact of Time–Space Prism Accessibil-

ity on Time Use Behavior and Its Propagation Through Intra-Household

Interaction. Transportation Letters: The International Journal of Trans-

portation Research, Vol. 2, No. 4, 2010, pp. 245–260.

2. Koplan, J. P., C. T. Liverman, and V. I. Kraak (eds.). Preventing Child-
hood Obesity: Health in the Balance. Institute of Medicine of the
National Academies. National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.,
2005.
3. Cooper, A. R., A. S. Page, L. J. Foster, and D. Qahwaji. Commuting to
School: Are Children Who Walk More Physically Active? American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 25, 2003, pp. 273–276.
4. Ewing, R., W. Schroeer, and W. Greene. School Location and Student
Travel: Analysis of Factors Affecting Mode Choice. In Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 1895, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies,
Washington, D.C., 2004, pp. 55–63.
5. Boarnet, M. G., C. L. Anderson, C. Day, T. E. McMillan, and M.
Alfonzo. Evaluation of the California Safe Routes to School Legislation:
Urban Form Changes and Children’s Active Transport to School. Amer-
ican Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 28, No. 2, 2005, pp. 134–140.
6. McMillan, T. E. The Relative Influence of Urban Form on a Child’s Travel
Mode to School. Transportation Research, Part A, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2007,
pp. 69–79.
7. Lin, J.-J., and H.-T. Chang. Built Environment Effects on Children’s
School Travel in Taipai: Independence and Travel Mode. Urban Studies,
Vol. 47, No. 4, 2010, pp. 867–889.
Transportation Research Record 2230
8. Yarlagadda, A. K., and S. Srinivasan. Modeling Children’s School Travel
Mode and Parental Escort Decisions. Transportation, Vol. 35, No. 2,
2008, pp. 201–218.
9. Schwanen, T. Gender Differences in Chauffeuring Children Among
Dual-Earner Families. The Professional Geographer, Vol. 59, No. 4, 2007,
pp. 447–462.
10. Schwanen, T., D. Ettema, and H. Timmermans. If You Pick up the Chil-
dren, I’ll Do the Groceries: Spatial Differences in Between-Partner
Interactions in Out-of-Home Household Activities. Environment and
Planning A, Vol. 39, No. 11, 2007, pp. 2754–2773.
11. Schwanen, T., and T. de Jong. Exploring the Juggling of Responsibilities
with Space–Time Accessibility Analysis. Urban Geography, Vol. 29,
No. 6, 2008, pp. 556–580.
12. Sidharthan, R., C. R. Bhat, R. M. Pendyala, and K. G. Goulias. Model
for Children’s School Travel Model Choice: Behavior Accounting for
Effects of Spatial and Social Interaction. In Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2213, Trans-
portation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
2011, pp. 78–86.
13. Yoon, S. Y., T. F. Golob, and K. G. Goulias. A California Statewide
Exploratory Analysis Correlating Land Use Density, Infrastructure Sup-
ply, and Travel Behavior. Presented at 88th Annual Transportation
Research Board Meeting, Washington, D.C., 2009.
14. Golob, T. F., and M. G. McNally. A Model of Activity Participation and
Travel Interactions Between Household Heads. Transportation Research,
Part B, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1997, pp. 177–194.
15. Golob, T. F. Structural Equation Modeling for Travel Behavior Research.
Transportation Research, Part B, Vol. 37, No. 1, 2003, pp. 1–25.
16. Gliebe, J. P., and F. S. Koppelman. Modeling Household Activity–Travel
Interactions as Parallel Constrained Choices. Transportation, Vol. 32,
2005, pp. 449–471.
17. Meister, K., M. Frick, and K. W. Axhausen. A GA-Based Household
Scheduler. Transportation, Vol. 32, 2005, pp. 473–494.
18. Zhang, J., H. Timmermans, and A. Borgers. A Utility-Maximizing
Model of Household Time Use for Independent, Shared, and Allocated
Activities Incorporating Group Decision Mechanisms. In Transporta-
tion Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 1807, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies,

Washington, D.C., 2002, pp. 1–8.

19. Zhang, J., and A. Fujiwara. Representing Household Time Allocation

Behavior by Endogenously Incorporating Diverse Intra-Household Inter-

actions: A Case Study in the Context of Elderly Couples. Transportation
Research, Part B, Vol. 40, No. 1, 2006, pp. 54–74.
20. Srinivasan, K. K., and S. R. Athuru. Analysis of Within-Household
Effects and Between-Household Differences in Maintenance Activity
Allocation. Transportation, Vol. 32, 2005, pp. 495–521.
21. Srinivasan, S., and C. R. Bhat. Modeling Household Interactions in
Daily In-Home and Out-of-Home Maintenance Activity Participation.
Transportation, Vol. 32, 2005, pp. 523–544.
22. Bradley, M., and P. Vovsha. A Model for Joint Choice of Daily Activity
Pattern Types of Household Members. Transportation, Vol. 32, 2005,
pp. 545–571.
23. Goulias, K. G., and K. Henson. On Altruists and Egoists in Activity
Participation and Travel: Who Are They and Do They Live Together?
Transportation, Vol. 33, No. 5, 2006, pp. 447–462.
24. Dijkstra, E. W. A Note on Two Problems in Connection with Graphs.
Numerische Mathematik, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1959, pp. 269–271.
25. Hägerstrand, T. What About People in Regional Science? Papers and
Proceedings of the Regional Science Association, Vol. 24, 1970, pp. 7–24.

This paper does not constitute a policy or regulation of any local, state, or federal
agency.

The Traveler Behavior and Values Committee peer-reviewed this paper.
