COVID-19 Information

Subscribe to our COVID-19 page for vaccination booking for 80+ residents,
modified programs and more.

Read More Dismiss alert




Active Transportation

Home / Explore and Play / Recreation / Active Transportation


Active transportation is any form of human-powered transportation, including
walking, cycling, roller-blading, skateboarding and moving with mobility devices. An
active transportation network includes sidewalks, multi-use paths, on-road bike
lanes and off-road trails.

Have a look as Town staff speak about funding and cycling in Halton Hills:



  Types of active transportation


  Bike lanes
  Bike lanes are typically located on urban cross-section roads (with curb and
  gutter) to create a physical space in the travelled portion of the roadway that is
  designed for one-way bicycle travel. Bike lanes are demarcated with pavement
  markings and signage. For more info see Bike Lanes and Bike Safety above.

  Sidewalks
  Sidewalks are located within the public road right-of-way throughout the urban
  areas of the Town of Halton Hills. Sidewalks are an important component of the
  municipal transportation network that provide a safe, healthy and sustainable
  alternative to using the automobile.

Off-road trails
Municipal off-road trails provide linkages throughout our community and
promote opportunity to explore nature in your backyard. In addition to walking
many of our trails can accommodate strollers or bicycles. The Bruce Trail is
found within the Niagara Escarpment lands and offers over 30km of hiking trails
within the Town of Halton Hills. For more information see Town of Halton
Hills trail map. In rural areas where there is limited active transportation
infrastructure, please consider the safety of all users and share the road.

Multi-use paths
A multi-use trail is a facility that is completely separate from the travelled
portion of a roadway, and may take the form of an in-boulevard trail in a public
road right-of-way or an off-road multi-use trail within a greenway, abandoned
rail corridor, or utility/hydro corridor. These types of trails are typically designed
to support the widest range of users including pedestrians, cyclists, in-line
skaters and skateboarders where trail surfaces permit such activities. Multi-use
trails located in parks primarily serve recreational pedestrians and cyclists but
can also be used for commuting.



Bike lanes


What is a bike lane?
         A dedicated space on the road for cyclists.
         In addition to regulatory signs, bike lane symbols are painted on the
         road along with a solid white line.


Benefits
         Reduces traffic and speeding;
         Promotes alternative mode of transportation;
         Provides identified space for cyclists; and
         Promotes healthy living (active transportation).


Who can use a bike lane?
         All cyclists can use bike lanes.
         EMS and Fire Trucks may cross or occupy a bike lane when responding
         to an emergency situation.

       Private vehicles under contract to ActiVan Accessible Transit may pick
       up or drop off members in bike lanes.


Restrictions
       Pedestrians are not to walk in bike lanes. They are to walk on
       sidewalks, multi-use paths or trails only.
       Any motorized vehicle, including taxis, delivery trucks and motorists are
       not allowed to park, stop, or drive in bike lanes.


Future plans
       Town staff will monitor the operation of bike lanes and consult with the
       community.
       The Town of Halton Hills has developed a comprehensive Cycling Master
       Plan (2010) to guide the implementation of town-wide cycling
       infrastructure.



Bicycle safety


       A bicycle is a vehicle under the Ontario Highway Traffic Act.
       Cyclists have the same rights and responsibilities to obey all traffic laws
       as other road users.
       Cyclists can and will be charged for disobeying traffic laws.
       See Cycling Related Fines for a list of laws and fines provided by the
       Ontario Ministry of Transportation.


Provincial laws
       Any cyclist under the age of 18 MUST wear a helmet.
       A bicycle must have a bell or horn in good working order.
       A bicycle must have at least one brake system on the rear wheel.
       A bicycle must have a white or amber light on the front and a red light
       or a reflector on the rear from one half hour before sunset to one half
       hour after sunrise or during inclement weather conditions.


Tips for cyclists
       Obey all traffic rules, signs and signals (including stop signs).

       Use the bike lane the same way a driver uses a lane of traffic.
       Use caution, be aware and respectful of other road users at all times.
       Use hand signals when turning, changing lanes and stopping.
       Stay on the right of the lane; pass on the left side of the lane.
       Safely scan the road behind you.
       See Guide to Safe Cycling provided by the Ontario Ministry of
       Transportation for more information.
       Ride single file and, where possible, move to the right to allow
       motorists to pass.


Tips for drivers
       Treat cyclists like any other vehicle.
       When passing a cyclist, drivers are required to maintain a distance of at
       least 1m, as nearly as practical, between the vehicle and bicycle.
       Use caution, signal, and check for cyclists when crossing a bike lane or
       turning.
       Scan the road prior to opening doors



Frequently asked questions


     1. What are the benefits of incorporating bike lanes?
        The benefits are reduction of motor vehicle operating speeds (traffic
        calming), reduces pedestrian crossing distance, promotes alternative
        mode of transportation, provides identified space for cyclists, connects
        to existing bike paths/trails and promotes healthy living (active
        transportation).


     2. What is the Cycling Master Plan?
        The Town of Halton Hills has developed a comprehensive Cycling Master
        Plan (2010) to guide the Town in implementing a Town-wide cycling
        network over the next 10 years and beyond. The Cycling Master Plan
        document was adopted by Council in 2010.


     3. What are Complete Streets?
        A Complete Street is defined as a street that is designed for all ages
        and abilities, designed for universal access specifically to accommodate
        safe and comfortable access for pedestrians, cyclists, transit users and
        drivers.

 4. What is Capital Works, and how is bike lane implementation
    funded?
    The projects are funded from a combination of Federal Gas Tax and the
    Town's Capital Program, which is approved annually by Council.


 5. How about bike safety?
    Halton Regional Police Service through the North Halton Injury
    Prevention Committee will undertake a bike safety workshop during the
    Bike to Market public event. The Town's Traffic division will provide
    additional bike information, safety tips and discuss the proposed bike
    lane implementation process.


 6. Rules of the road - Highway Traffic Act (HTA):
    Bicycles are designated as vehicles under the HTA and as such are
    required to obey all the same rules and regulations as automobiles
    when being operated on a public roadway. It is important to note that
    even when bike lanes are provided, cyclists are not obligated to use
    them. Should they choose to do so, cyclists are legally permitted to
    travel with mixed traffic in a standard motor vehicle travel lane.


 7. Uncontrolled crosswalks?
    Based on the bike lane implementation project, travel lanes for
    motorized vehicles will be narrowed. Therefore, the conflict area
    between pedestrians and motor vehicles will be reduced and pedestrian
    safety improved. Uncontrolled crosswalks will be retrofitted with
    warning tab signs indicating Pedestrians Wait for Gap message.


 8. Is there more school crossing guard information?
    School entry and dismissal times managed by each school board are
    provided on their websites. Staggered dismissal times would benefit
    traffic distribution and reduce traffic congestion in front of the schools.
    The Town manages the school crossing guard program. Visit our
    crossing guards page for more information.


 9. Are the bike lanes suitably designed?
    Yes, the width of the lanes are designed within acceptable standards
    ensuring public safety.


10. Is on-street parking affected?
    For more information regarding the Town of Halton Hills Uniform Traffic
    Control By-law No. 1984-0001, our parking page.


11. How about winter parking?
    Halton Hills allows a maximum parking duration of 5 hours, unless
    otherwise posted. During winter time, overnight parking prohibition is in

          effect between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m.


      12. What is pavement marking removal?
          It is the removal of old paint (water-based) and/or durable paint
          (plastic).


      13. What type of disruption can residents expect?
          For a short period of time residents may experience disruption such as
          noise and dust during the removal of the existing lane markings (during
          the day) and implementation of the new lane marking (overnight).
          Certain sections of the road will be inaccessible, but clearly marked.


      14. What if road work is delayed?
          The Town will hand deliver a notice informing residents of any major
          delays, next steps, and continue to communicate with the affected
          homeowner.


      15. Where is the future bike lane integration being implemented?
          The Town intends to evaluate Argyll Road, a roadway identified in the
          Town's Cycling Master Plan, for the feasibility of incorporating cycling
          lanes linking Eight Line, Miller Drive and Mountainview Road.




The Town of Halton Hills

1 Halton Hills Drive
Halton Hills Ontario L7G 5G2

© Copyright 2020

