School Travel Planning
What is School Travel Planning (STP)? STP encourages active transportation to and from school by developing an action
plan to build upon strengths and work to remove concerns around your school.
Characteristics of STP
       Sustainable 5-step process
       School ownership
       Supportive partnerships
       Comprehensive process
       School-specific concerns identified
       Ongoing action plans
Find out more about: 
       The 5-step STP process and getting started
       See schools (past and present) with STPs
       Success Stories of schools making a difference
Literature Review adn PolicyScanImproving Safety of Active SchoolTravel Through Decreasing Traffic SpeedsActive & Safe Routes to School (ASRTS)Partnership of Elgin-St. Thomas, London,Middlesex, and Oxford.School Travel Planning Manual                                               
Green Communities Canada is the innovator of School Travel
Planning. The process and resources found within our local
School Travel Planning Manual have been adapted from the
national School Travel Planning Toolkit to be specific to the
Elgin, Middlesex and Oxford communities.
A printed copy of the School Travel Planning (STP) Manual is available for any school within the municipalities of Elgin,
London, Middlesex, Oxford or St. Thomas, that is undertaking a School Travel Plan.
Please Contact Us if you are interested in starting a STP and are in need of your own copy of the STP Manual.

Benefits of Active Transportation
      Improves physical and mental health
      Improves traffic and safety around your school
      Improves air quality and helps the environment
      Has students arrive at school alert and ready to learn
      Increases connection to your community
Additional benefits to active transportation
Resources
      Improving Safety of Active School Travel through Decreasing Traffic Speeds - Middlesex-London Health Unit
References
Green  Communities Canada (2011). Active & Safe Routes to School.

