Bureau de santé Porcupine Health Unit




Active Transportation
Active transportation is a great way to t regular physical activity into your day! Active transportation refers to
any form of human-powered transportation – walking, cycling, using a non-motorized wheelchair, snow shoeing,
skiing, skating or skateboarding. Sometimes, a trip to the corner store will be more enjoyable if done by bike or by
foot.


Bene ts of active transportation
  Improved public health and reduced healthcare costs by ghting obesity and chronic illnesses like heart disease and Type 2 diabetes.
  Reduction in greenhouse gasses emission by reducing your carbon footprint.
  Economic savings on a second vehicles, fuel and parking.
  Reduction in traf c congestion issues
  Increase access to children, youth, seniors, low income residents and individuals with disabilities that do not permit them to become licensed to
  operate a vehicle

Every year, more and more Canadian cities are making active transportation a priority and enjoying the bene ts of having more healthy
and sustainable communities. Here are some examples of how to support active transportation:


Municipalities that support active transportation
  Offer safe cycling routes within its community.
  Encourage its residents to share the road with cyclists and pedestrians.
  Ensure the safety of pedestrians and cyclists of all ages by putting in place infrastructure and barriers.
  Maintain pedestrian sidewalks and cycling routes throughout the seasons.
  Provide bicycle racks throughout the community.
  Develop a network of trails and cycling routes designed for both recreation and active transportation.
  Ensure the street designs are pleasing and inviting for pedestrians and cyclists
  Ensure there are adequate green spaces and parks.
  Make access to public transit easy for pedestrian and cyclists.
  Encourage feedback from citizens, pedestrian and cycling groups.


Workplaces that support active transportation
  Provide secure bicycle storage, lockers and shower facilities for employees.

  Allow more exible dress codes for those who jog and/or cycle to work.
  Organize workplace challenges, employee recognition programs or support community events to increase awareness.
  Work with the municipalities to map out safe and ef cient routes to work and to address safety concerns.
  Encourage its employees to walk rather than drive when possible.
  Offer or subsidize safe cycling clinics for their employees.


Schools that support active transportation
  Support and encourage their students to adopt an active way to get to school.
  Work with the municipality to identify safe routes for children and to address safety concerns.
  Install bike racks at the school in a prominent location for suitable monitoring.
  Encourage parents to form "guided walks" to and from school for young neighbourhood children.
  Have teachers work with children to identify the safest routes to get to school while teaching children about traf c and pedestrian safety.
  Offer cycling skill and safety courses.
  Work with parents, motorists and the community at large, to make the trip to school a safe trip for children and youth.


Tagged With:   cycling   education    physical activity   schools   transportation    walking   workplace


