
       Cycling and Walking
       Walking and Cycling in Durham Region?
       Cycling and walking are healthy travel options in Durham Region! Walk or ride your bike to work,
       school, run errands or just for fun and exercise.
       The Region of Durham is currently updating the Regional Cycling Plan. Visit the Regional
       Cycling Plan 2020 webpage to learn more about this project and
       how you can get involved.
          Benefits of Walking and Cycling
          Walking and cycling are both great ways for children and adults to achieve the recommended
          number of minutes of physical activity per week as recommended by the Canadian Society for
          Exercise Physiology (CSEP). Visit CSEP's website to learn more about the
          Canadian 24-Hour Movement Guidelines.
          Active modes of transportation, such as cycling and walking, can help people to:
                       Achieve and maintain a healthier weight and improve cardiovascular and respiratory
                       health.
                       Improve mental health and well-being; manage stress and anxiety.
                       Improve sleep, learning, concentration and memory.
          Participating in physical activities like walking and biking can help lower your risk of developing
          chronic diseases such as heart disease, stroke, and diabetes.
          Other benefits of walking, cycling and other forms of active transportation include:
                       Reduced energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.
                       Reduce pollution and congestion.
                       Reduce the amount of money you spend on gas, vehicle maintenance and parking.
          Cycling Safely
          Before you head out on a bike, prepare yourself by learning about what equipment you will
          need, proper bike maintenance, the rules of the road and riding safely. Here are some resources
          that can help:
                        Ontario's Safe Cycling Guide
                        Durham Region Youth Cycling Guide
                        CAN-BIKE Online Education
          Taking Your Bike on the Bus
          All DRT buses are equipped with bike racks. They hold up to two bicycles and are available on a
          first-come, first-served basis. You are responsible for loading and unloading your bicycle.
          Before the bus arrives
          Remove loose items from your bike, such as water bottles or items in your
          basket.
          When the bus arrives
          Make eye contact with the driver. Signal to them that you are going to be
          using the bike rack.
                    1. Open the rack: At the front of the bus, lift up the handle near the
                        top of the bike rack and lower it.
                    2. Put bike on rack: If there is no other bike, place your bike on the
                        slot closest to the bus.
                    3. Move the arm: Lift the support arm up and over the front tire.
          Getting off the bus
          Let the drive know that you will be taking your bike. To remove your bike, lift up the arm and
          place it down on the rack. Take your bike off the rack, and if there are no other bikes, lift the
          rack back onto the bus.
          Where can I bike?
          Trying to understand where you're legally allowed to ride a bike? Rules can vary from
          municipality to municipality.
          On the Road
          A bicycle is considered a vehicle under the Ontario Highway Traffic Act.           Cyclists have the same rights and responsibilities to obey all
          traffic laws as other road users. A bike travelling on a roadway at less than the normal speed of
          traffic should stay as close as possible to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway. You can
          legally ride your bike on any road in Ontario unless:
                       The road is an expressway or freeway highway (such as Highway 401 or 407).
                       No Bicycle signs are posted.
          On multi-use trails
          More than 350 kilometres of recreational trails weave throughout Durham Region. Here are
          some resources to help you plan your next cycling trip.
          Cycling map and brochures
                       Ajax Trail Map
                       Clarington Cycling Map
                       Durham Cycle Tours Map
                       Durham Trails Interactive Map
                       Great Lakes Waterfront Trail Map
                       Oshawa Recreational Trails Brochure
                       Ontario Greenbelt Cycling Route
                       Town of Whitby Active Transportation Map
          Learn more about trails and cycling in your municipality
                       Town of Ajax
                       Township of Brock
                       Municipality of Clarington
                       City of Oshawa
                       City of Pickering
                       Township of Scugog
                       Township of Uxbridge
                       Town of Whitby

