                      WHAT IS SCHOOL TRAVEL PLANNING

School Travel Planning     (STP) is a community-based approach to increase physical activity by
encouraging active forms of transportation (i.e. walking, cycling, skateboarding, rollerblading and
scooting) for the school journey. Public health nurses use the STP approach when working with the
participating local schools.


School Travel Planning     is a model that looks at addressing barriers to and incentives for walking to
school as a way to take action on active school travel.


The School Travel Planning (STP) approach gets school and community stakeholders working together
to create and implement active school travel plans that use the Five E’s of the STP model.
Key aspects of the STP approach include:


1. Partnership and collaboration involving school boards, schools, municipalities, parents, students,
  public health and community partners such as police services and environmental organizations.

2. STP facilitation to bring everyone together and coordinate activities at the individual school level. For
  the On the Move project, Public Health Nurses from the Simcoe Muskoka District Health Unit are the
  STP facilitators.

3. A comprehensive Active School Travel (AST) Action Plan which is developed by school
  stakeholders based on the unique needs of the individual school community. Implementation and
  evaluation of the AST Action Plan generally carries over from one school year to the next.


To ensure a broad and sustainable approach, the AST Action Plan is designed to address five areas
called the 5 E’s : Education, Encouragement, Engineering, Enforcement and Evaluation.


Education: Actions meant to build skills, confidence, and awareness to allow students to walk and
wheel to school safely (e.g. traffic safety training, cycling skills workshops, school route mapping).
Education can also occur about the added benefit of STP to the human health and the health of the
environment (e.g. few greenhouse gas emissions, cleaner air to breathe).


Encouragement: Actions to inspire students, parents and school staff to try active ways to get to and
from school (e.g. walk and wheel events and celebrations, the walking school bus, iwalk or iwheel club,

champions of change for climate change).


Engineering: Actions that create safe and accessible school sites, neighbourhoods and routes to school
(e.g. traffic and wayfinding signage, parking restrictions, crosswalk improvements, crossing guards,
installation of bike racks, school site location and design).


Enforcement: Actions to ensure traffic and parking rules are obeyed to improve safety around schools
(e.g. monitor speed, ticket traffic violations, supervise student drop-off locations).


Evaluation: Actions that use data to design solutions, measure success, and demonstrate impact (e.g.
walking and cycling audit, school travel survey, traffic counts, community walk about and family travel
survey).


The 6 Phases of School Travel Planning
1. Set up the project

2. Assess conditions

3. Develop AST Action Plan

4. Implement AST Action Plan

5. Evaluate progress

6. Keep it going


Find out more from Ontario Active School Travel and the School Travel Planning Toolkit.

