HOME   ACTIVE SCHOOL TRAVEL




Active School Travel
What is Active School Travel?

Using any human-powered active mode of transportation to commute to and from school including, but not
limited to:

         Biking

         Walking

         Scootering

         Inline skating

         Skateboarding

         Via wheelchair




What are the benefits of Active School Travel?

The benefits of active school travel can be attributed to five broad categories: physical health, mental health,
environmental health, academic success, and increased traffic safety. More specifically, children who actively
commute get more total daily physical activity. With enough intensity active school travel can contribute to
improved cardiovascular fitness. Evidence indicates that active school travel is connected to healthier body
weights and body composition.

Children who actively commute report greater levels of happiness and conversely report lower levels of stress
and anxiety. Reducing the number of individual families commuting by motor vehicle decreases greenhouse
gas emissions resulting in cleaner air in school zones and a healthier environment.

Active school travel contributes to healthy brain development and academic success, particularly among girls.
Students who engage in active school travel have higher grade point averages, and in particular, cycling has
been related to higher grades in mathematics.




Learn more about Active School travel in Thunder Bay

EcoSuperior and the Thunder Bay District Health Unit have received funding from the government of Ontario
and Green Communities Canada to deliver active school travel initiatives in Thunder Bay. This program has
been coined Walk or Wheel (WOW) TBay. WOW TBay intends to deliver sustainable active school travel
education and initiatives in our community. Over the 26 month funding period, four schools will work with
facilitators from Ecosuperior and TBDHU to evaluate existing conditions for active school travel and develop
a comprehensive school travel plans. Two schools will participate throughout the whole WOW TBay
program, while a second round of two schools will join the program in 2019. School travel planning
committees will be established and will work with facilitators and the established Municipal Stakeholder
committee comprised of individuals from:

Let’s get more children walking or wheeling to and from school Thunder Bay!




For Further Information

Call the Physical Activity Program: (807) 625-5900

or toll-free 1-888-294-6630


EXTERNAL LINKS

 <U+E912>   Ontario Active School Travel

 <U+E912>   Student Transportation Services of Thunder Bay

 <U+E912>   Ecosuperior – Active School Travel

 <U+E912>   City of Thunder Bay’s Active Transportation

 <U+E912>   Green Communities Canada


Last Updated: 22/02/2021


