
Active School Travel
What is Active School Travel?
Active School Travel (AST) refers to any form of human-powered, non-motorized transportation to get to and from school or the bus stop. This
includes walking, biking, scootering, skateboarding, rollerblading, or using a mobility assisted device.
Active School Travel Makes a Difference
Healthier students
Children who walk or bike to school are more physically active. They also report lower levels of stress, less depression and anxiety, and more
happiness!
Getting active for the school journey supports healthy brain development and is linked to improved learning and focus in the classroom.
Regularly walking or biking to school helps students build lifelong habits of active and independent mobility.
Safer school zones, healthier communities
Reducing car traffic at bell times creates safer school zones for all students.
Improving the safety of students' routes to school enhances the walkability and accessibility of our communities.
Fewer emissions, less air pollution
When students and families choose active and sustainable modes of transportation, greenhouse gas emissions from private motor vehicles are
reduced. This results in cleaner air in school zones and a healthier environment!
Learn more about the Timiskaming Active School Travel Project
In 2019, the Timiskaming Health Unit received funding from Green Communities Canada and the Government of Ontario to fuel initiatives that will
improve safety in school zones and get more students active for the school journey.
We are working with elementary schools in New Liskeard, Earlton, Englehart, and Kirkland Lake to make active travel an easy and safe choice for
students and families.
We do this by:
       Collaborating with schools, parents, School Boards, municipal staff, and police to identify traffic concerns and brainstorm solutions
       Carrying out traffic observations and safety assessments of the school zone and students’ routes to school
       Offering Bike Rodeos to teach grade 5 and 6 students how to ride their bicycle safely
       Organizing school-wide Walk and Wheel celebrations such as Winter Walk Day (February 5, 2020) and Bike to School Week (May 25-29, 2020)
Resources
Making the Case for Active School Travel Fact Sheet and References
Media Release - Active School Travel Project Launched in Timiskaming
Ontario Active School Travel