Physical Activity for Schools
Public Health Nurses are available to provide schools in York Region with consultation, support, programs and
resources on physical activity for staff, students and parents. Find out how to contact the York Region Public
Health Nurse for your school by calling Health Connection. The resources below are
available to support schools that identify physical activity as a priority.
Active Tools for Schools
Active Tools for Schools is designed to help elementary schools make active choices with user-friendly
resources promoting increased levels of physical activity.
Active Tools for Schools breaks down the broad concept of physical activity into five different topics with
strategies that support and influence physical activity in schools. Review the different topics as well at the
suggested ideas and activities to support the development and implementation of the Healthy Schools Action
Plan. The Active Tools for Schools Checklist and Prioritization Tool is a great way for your school to get started.
School-Based Interventions to Promote Physical Activity
       Active Play
       Daily Physical Activity
       Active School Travel
       Active Fundraisers, Celebrations and Rewards
       Positive Role Modelling and Reinforcement
Active School Travel
The Active School Travel program supports elementary and secondary schools with education and initiatives
that encourage families to choose active and sustainable travel to and from school which includes walking,
cycling, wheeling, taking the school bus (if eligible) as well as parking and walking a block.
Why the concern?
       Fewer children are walking and wheeling for their school journey
       Canadian children are not getting enough physical activity
       We need to take action to help the environment, reduce greenhouse gas emissions
       Poor air quality has a negative impact on a child’s health and cognitive development
       School site traffic is a growing burden
       Increased car use makes school zones congested, polluted, and a hazard for pedestrians
Benefits to active travel to and from school:
       Physical activity is associated with both physical and mental health benefits
       Increases alertness and attention during the school day
       Brain process like focus, memory, and recall is enhanced after single or repeated bouts of physical activity
       Active school travel reduces stress, depression and anxiety
           Walking to School Has Many Social Benefits

Use the resource Active School Travel: Activities for Schools to support your school with activities and
initiatives that encourages active modes of travel to and from school. This resource will give you access to step-
by-step information to use throughout the year.
For more information or to get started, please contact.
If you have any issues or concerns with on-site infrastructure, please contact your school board for assistance. If
you have issues or concerns with off-site infrastructure, please contact your local municipality.
Resources for Teacher Champions/Educators
Students learn about the built and natural environment through exploration.
These lesson plans can help teachers to engage students in classroom lessons:
Grade 1: Science and Technology
Grade 5: Social Studies
Grade 9: Health and Physical Education
Teach road safety for children and youth
You’ll find:
        Learn tips
        Lesson plans
        Community engagement kits
        Teaching and learning strategies
        Printable posters
        Grading rubrics
        Sample achievement charts
Modify and use for your classroom!

Videos:
       Walking to School
       Making Tracks
       Pedestrian and Cyclists Visibility at Night
       Pedestrian Safety - Running
       Pedestrian Safety - Eye Contact
       Pedestrian Safety - Crosswalks
       How to Cycle Safely Through Intersection
       Winter Cycling
       Be Back to School Safe
Links
       York Region Traffic Safety Program
       Ontario Active School Travel
       Active and Safe Routes to School – Teacher’s Kit
       Eco Schools Canada
       Helmet safety
       ParticipACTION
Active Play
Active Play, also called unstructured play, contributes to overall physical activity in children. According to the
Canadian Public Health Association Children’s Unstructured Play Positional Statement (2019), unstructured
play provides a variety of benefits for children and youth health and well-being including:
       Physical health and gross motor skills
       Mental and emotional health
       Social health and team work
       Learning and attention at school
       Resiliency and risk management skills
For more information on Active Play visit.
One of the main barriers to active play is the weather. It is important to consider weather precautions and dress
appropriately for outdoor play. Refer to the York Catholic District School Board Extreme Weather Policy #221
or the York Region District School Board Extreme Hot and Cold Weather and UV Protection Guideline for more
information.
Fact Sheets
       How to Dress for Outdoor Winter Play
       How to Dress for Outdoor Fall Play
       How to Dress for Outdoor Summer Play
       How to Dress for Outdoor Spring Play
       Have your kids played today?
Prolonged exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays from the sun is a leading cause of skin cancer. According to the
Canadian Cancer Society, there are 6 ways to be sun safe:
       Check the UV index every day
       Seek shade, especially between 11am and 3pm when the UV rays are the strongest
       Cover up using wide brimmed hats and clothing

       Wear sunglasses with UVA and UVB protection
       Use sunscreen properly
For more information on sun safety, visit the Canadian Cancer Society.
DPA (Daily Physical Activity)
Daily Physical Activity (DPA) was mandated by the Ontario Ministry of Education in 2005 and
requires all elementary students to have a minimum of twenty minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity
each day during instructional time.
Active Tools for Schools – Enhancing DPA supports schools in planning and implementing DPA by introducing
the concept of creating a healthy, active school environment.
Resources
       DPA resources for schools
       Daily Physical Activity Resources | Ophea Teaching Tools (login required - contact Ophea)
PLAY Program (Peer Leadership for Active Youth)
The PLAY program offers leadership training for students in grades five to eight who, once trained, teach
interactive and co-operative games to students in kindergarten to grade three at recess. This program promotes
positive spaces for learning and play by enhancing student leadership skills, promoting inclusivity of all students
on the playground, increasing physical activity opportunities and enhancing social skills and overall mental well-
being.
The Handbook for PLAY Leader Champions is made up of five sections to guide leaders and junior students
through a half day training session. There is also a Handbook for PLAY Program Student Leaders that provides
information and skill building through interactive activities where students learn about leadership, teamwork,
conflict resolution, communication and respect. Following the training, student PLAY leaders implement their
new skills while they lead active and fun games on the playground. To request PLAY resources for your school,
please contact your York Region Public Health Nurse or call York Region Health Connection.
York Region Public Health’s PLAY program links to elementary school curriculum expectations and supports
the development of positive climates for learning in the York Region District School Board and the York
Catholic District School Board.
Physical Activity in Secondary Schools
Opportunities for secondary students to engage in physical activity are important for academic success and
physical and mental well-being. A variety of resources and initiatives are outlined in a Physical Activity
Framework for Secondary Schools.
pause to PLAY
The annual spring pause to PLAY Challenge encourages students to put their TVs, gaming devices,
smartphones, tablets and computers on “pause” for one full week and become more physically active through
play. Parents can also join in with their kids at home!
Teachers and instructors can register their classrooms for the pause to PLAY Challenge with the chance to win
prizes. Public Health Nurses will support classrooms, students, schools and parents with pause to PLAY posters,
scoresheets, and tips during the challenge.

Check out these tips on reducing screen time at home:
       Place limits on screen time
       Avoid using screen-time as reward or punishment
       Role modelling by following these tips yourself
       Create screen-free bedrooms
       Turn screens off during meals
       Offer fun alternatives to screen time
       Know how often you should be moving
       Improve your physical literacy
Fact Sheets
       pause to PLAY
       Tips to Reduce Screen Time
       Tips for Active Play
For more information on the pause to PLAY challenge, please email York Region Public Health School Services.

