  Parent Login +     Contractor Login +  School Login +  Staff Login +                     English
              Ottawa Student Transportation
                                                                Search
              Authority
                                                                                                   — Active Transportation
Home <U+F054> Active Transportation
Active Transportation
Help support student success through Active Transportation!
Did you know that walking or rolling to school not only improves children’s health but can help improve academic performance? Th
increased physical activity improves alertness and attention span during the school day! An active school commute also reduces r
congestion in school zones and contributes to reducing greenhouse gas emissions – it’s a win-win for everyone!
For those that can’t walk the whole way, parking away from the school and walking the rest of the way (also known as Walk-a-Bloc
another great way to add active transportation to your daily commute. Walking or rolling even part-way reduces traffic stress and
increases the quality of time spent with your children.
Help play a role in encouraging active transportation by learning the multiple benefits of walking to school.
Below are resources and information on OSTA’s programs available to teachers, parents and guardians.                           <U+E601>
                                                                                                                               <U+E602>
                  School Active Transportation
Find out more about our Walking Route Maps and Walking School Bus Program
  - Walking Route Maps by School - Find your walking route to school
    Walking Route maps are designed to indicate the quickest and most direct routes to school. The maps include
    the location of traffic lights and signs, crossing guards and any hazards in the neighbourhood. The routes are
    identified by directional arrows that lead towards the school.

  Maps are updated throughout the summer in preparation for the beginning of school in September.
    Find your school's map here! +
- Walk-a-Block Maps by School - Park away from the school and walk the rest of the way
  Walk-a-Block maps are designed to encourage parents who drive their children to school, to park 5 to 10 minutes away
  from the school and walk the rest of the way. By using Walk-a-Block, traffic congestion is dispersed away from the
  congested school area, creating a safer school zone for all.
  The maps identify a 400 and 800-metre radius around the school. They also identify neighbourhood street names,
  pathways and potential quiet places to park.
    Find your school's map here! +
                                                                                                                                                <U+E601>
                                                                                                                                                <U+E602>
- Walk&Roll Meetup by School - Walk as a small group to school
  Walk&Roll Meetup Maps are designed to encourage students to meetup at designated locations and walk as a
  small group to school. Walking as a small group, children benefit from “safety in numbers”. Walk&Roll Meetups
  are unsupervised and designed for children grades 4 and up. The Walk&Roll Meetup stops were conveniently
  selected based on the location of walking students in the area. The maps also identify recommended walking
  routes to school, location of traffic lights and signs, crossing guards and any hazards in the neighbourhood
  Walking routes should be planned ahead of time and practiced before the first day of school or the first day of walking.
  Maps will constantly be updated throughout the summer in preparation for the beginning of school in September.
    Find your school's map here! +
- Walking School Bus Information - Walk as a group with a professional leader
  The Walking School Bus (WSB) is designed to promote active transportation and healthy living. Students
  walk to school with a group of up to 10 peers and a professional leader, following a specific route and
  schedule. Walking to school is a safe, convenient, healthy and fun way for your child to travel to school with
  their friends. It helps them get the daily physical activity they need to be healthy and concentrate better at
  school.
  Similar to an adult crossing guard, each WSB has a paid leader who has been trained by the Ottawa Safety
  Council, screened and first-aid certified to walk with your child to school. They follow a specific route and
  schedule which has been approved by OSTA and its partners. OSTA’s Walking School Bus (WSB) program is
  offered in 13 Ottawa schools.
    More Info +
  Hybrid Walking School Bus
  Similar to the Walking School Bus, the Hybrid Walking School Bus (HWSB) promotes active transportation and healthy living by having students walk t
  school with a group of 10 to 30 peers and a professional leader and trained volunteers, following a specific route and schedule.
  Each HWSB has one paid leader who has been trained by the Ottawa Safety Council, screened and first-aid certified.

   HWSB’s will have at least one additional volunteer leader who will also be screened and trained by Ottawa Safety Council to walk with your child to sch
   Two special schools have been selected to participate in OSTA’s new Hybrid Walking School Bus (HWSB).
   • St Rita CS
   • Georges Vanier
      More info +
   Volunteer Walking School Bus Leaders Wanted!
   In the search for ways to make walking to school safer, more fun and more convenient, communities are
   finding that walking school buses can make a real difference. A Walking School Bus (WSB) is simply a group
   of children who walk to school together under adult Supervision, following a specific route and schedule.
   Are you walking your child to school every day? Are you retired and looking for an opportunity to get some
   exercise and help the students get to school safely?
   OSTA and the Ottawa Safety Council are looking for community volunteers to walk children to school. Flexible
   schedules and training are provided at no cost to you!
   Register here to find out more about becoming a Volunteer Hybrid WSB Leader
Check out our safety tips and graphics for schools, parents and guardians to download
 - Pedestrian Safety - Tips for young children, Ottawa Safety Council's student training, how to book a Bike Rodeo
   Teach Kids How to Walk Safely
   It's important to teach children the skills to become confident, safe and independent
   pedestrians. Be a role model by teaching them pedestrian safety tips at home and in the
                                                                                                                                                         <U+E601>
   classroom. Practice walking with them in real-world situations to help them become familiar with                                                      <U+E602>
   their neighbourhood and learn the benefits of active transportation.
   Download your school's walking route map to find the quickest and safest route to school.
   Download the Pedestrian Safety Tips poster
   For more resources on pedestrian safety please visit our pedestrian safety tips page!
   For Teachers:
   Book a Bike Rodeo with the Ottawa Safety Council
   Book a Pedestrian Safety Presentation with the Ottawa Safety Council
 - School Zone Safety - Graphics to promote safe driving, tip sheets to report unsafe driving, student posters for peer-to-peer influen
   School Zone Safety Starts With You!
   It is essential for drivers to practice safe driving habits when travelling near school zones to ensure the safety of everyone in the neighbourhood. Down
   our school zone safety resources to help promote safety in your school zone.
   Report issues in your school zone:
   By working together, we can make our school zones a safer experience for everyone. If you see a traffic issue in a school please report it, it only takes
   couple of minutes. Anyone can submit a request to 3-1-1. Some examples of what to call 3-1-1 for include: reporting vehicles parked in a no-parking zo
   requesting a designated crosswalk or street signage, or requesting a Crossing Guard or snow removal.
    Category                      Poster                     Download Link

   School Zone Safety                                    Safer School Zone Infographic
                                                         Distracted Driving Poster
                                                         Don't Drive, Let Them Ride Poster
                                                         School Zone Safety Banner
                                                                                                                                                     <U+E601>
                                                                                                                                                     <U+E602>
                                                         Tips for reporting traffic and safety concerns: 311 Reporting Tip Sheet_EN
                                                         Conseils pour signaler des problèmes de circulation et de sécurité: 311 Reporting Tip Sheet_FR
- Tip Sheets - Active Transportation Tips for Parents/Guardians and Teachers, Tips for reporting traffic and safety concerns
  Resources for parents:
  Active Transportation Parent Tip Sheet (English): Parent Tip Sheet_EN
  Conseil aux parents sur le transport actif (Français): Parent Tip Sheet_FR
  Resources for Schools:
  Active Transportation School Tip Sheet (English): School Tip Sheet_EN
  Conseil aux écoles sur le transport actif (Français): School Tip Sheet_FR
  Report issues in your school zone:
  Tips for reporting traffic and safety concerns: 311 Reporting Tip Sheet_EN
  Conseils pour signaler des problèmes de circulation et de sécurité: 311 Reporting Tip Sheet_FR
- Activities - Teachers and parents/guardians can do in the classroom or at home

Download the following resources that can be done at home or in the classroom!
 Category             Poster                                   Download Link
 Activities                                                    Pedestrian Safety Skills Colouring Book
                                                               Bus Safety Skills Colouring Book
                                                               ISpy Game (Fall, Spring)                 <U+E601>
                                                                                                        <U+E602>
                                                               Tracking Sheet (Fall, Spring)
                                                               Participation Certificate (Fall, Spring)
                                                               ISpy Bingo Game (Winter Edition)
                                                               Tracking Sheet (Winter Edition)

                                                                           Participation Certificate (Winter Edition)
Teachers: Take a look at some of the resources available to your school
 - School Active Transportation Planning Information and Signup
   Active school travel makes a difference, find out how your school can be part of the change.
   This past fall, OSTA conducted an online survey to better understand how students were getting to school and if any traffic impacts were observed aro
   their school site. The survey results showed that schools that have participated in the School Active Transportation Planning (SATP) have a higher<U+E601>
                                                                                                                                                     upta
   of active transportation than non-SATP schools.
                                                                                                                                                     <U+E602>
   School Active Transportation Planning (SATP) is a community-based approach for increasing rates of active school travel. Based on Green Communiti
   Canada model of School Travel Planning (STP), the SATP process brings together stakeholders at the school and regional levels to create and implem
   action plans that use all five E’s (education, encouragement, engineering, enforcement, and evaluation) to:
       address travel-related issues at schools; and
       encourage students in the walk zone to walk or wheel for the school journey (and encourage students in the bus zone to ride the school bu
   The SATP process is guided and supported by an SATP Facilitator who brings everyone together, coordinates activities, and uses the STP Toolkit to
   compile a School Travel Plan.
   As part of their commitment to advancing active and sustainable transportation options for Ottawa residents, EnviroCentre delivers School Active
   Transportation Planning services to local OCDSB and OCSB schools. These services are delivered as part of the School Active Transportation
   Program on behalf of OSTA and the City of Ottawa and in partnership with Ottawa Public Health.
   Eleven schools in Ottawa are currently participating in the School Active Transportation Program (SATP). Each year, hands-up classroom surveys are
   conducted over five days in all SATP schools. This historical data provides some context and points of comparison for the 2020 OSTA Transportation
   Survey.

                                                                                                                                      <U+E601>
                                                                                                                                      <U+E602>
  A copy of the survey results overview can be downloaded here.
  Help encourage families to choose active and sustainable modes of transportation for their children’s daily commute by becoming a SATP
  School.
  To find out how your school can participate in School Active Transportation Planning (SATP), contact: Envirocentre - SATP Signup
- School Active Transportation Toolkit - Learn how to plan your Walk to School Day Event
  What can a school do to increase the number of students choosing active transportation? Make it fun! Show
  the school community that your school encourages walking! You can do that by having a few dedicated days each year
  when the school comes together and celebrates active transportation with a Walk to School Day event.
  Sometimes known as an “I Walk” event, a Walk to School Day event is a fun and easy way for families to try active
  transportation for the first time and to celebrate those already walking and wheeling every day.
  In order to help you plan your first event, or make an existing event even better, the Ottawa Student Transportation
  Authority (OSTA), in collaboration with EnviroCentre, has prepared this toolkit. It is free to use and full of ideas, planning
  tips and tools.
  To download a copy of the toolkit please click here!
  For info about the toolkit please visit the toolkit page.
- Pitter Patter Grant - Information and application

   The Ottawa Student Transportation Authority wants to help increase physical activity opportunities for students by supporting and expandin
   School Active Transportation (SAT) initiatives for elementary students.
   The OSTA Pitter Patter Grant is a micro-grant of up to $250, available to local schools who wish to implement or support a SAT initiative during the<U+E601>
                                                                                                                                                       cur
   school year. The grant will help defray some or all of the costs for Walk to School Events and classroom activities.
                                                                                                                                                       <U+E602>
   Upcoming Event Date Ideas
   • Winter Walk Day in February/March
   • Earth Day in April
   • Environmental Week in June
   • International Walk to School Month in October
   Ready to find out more?
   Applying is easy! Simply fill out the online form:
   Pitter Patter Online Application Form
Try out these links to see some other great online resources
 + Resources from our Partners - Links to other great online resources
                                  Ready to find out how you can promote walking and rolling to school?
         To participate in School Active Transportation Planning (SATP), contact: Envirocentre – SATP Signup
Subscribe to Receive Email                                                             Live OC Transpo Updates
Subscribe to our mailing list to receive notifications of transportation               Daily route changes resulting from detours and
cancellations right to your handheld device or personal computer. Sign up              cancelled trips are listed on OC Transpo's website.
with your email address, and unsubscribe at any time.

Subscribe + Unsubscribe +                                            Please contact your child's school to inquire whether your child is elig
                                                                     receive a bus pass.
                                                                       View OC delays +
                          Ottawa Student Transportation Authority | Copyright © 2021
                          1645 Woodroffe Avenue, Room 102, Nepean, ON K2G 1W2 | Phone: 613-224-8800
                          Sitemap | Contact Us | Accessibilty | Disclaimer and Terms of Use
                          Questions about this website? Email: admin@ottawaschoolbus.ca
                          This website has been optimized for all browsers and handheld devices. It is best viewed in Google Chrome
                                                                                                                                        <U+E601>
                                                                                                                                        <U+E602>

