The Walk Zone
Students who reside in the walking area benefit from a daily walk (or bike, or skateboard,
or scooter ride) to school in many different ways.
This simple journey can mean so much.
Your school board provides students with the opportunity
to walk or cycle to school whenever possible because it is a
great choice for so many reasons.
Physical health
Walking or cycling to school regularly gives your child
opportunities for daily physical activity that will help him
or her avoid chronic disease and develop healthy habits
that may continue into later years. ParticipACTION
recommends that children accumulate several hours’ worth
of light movement every day. Walking to school is a perfect opportunity to get it; more than
half the body’s muscles are designed for walking; it is a natural movement that is virtually
injury-free.
Mental focus
Students who get physical activity in the morning arrive at school more alert and ready to
learn – and studies show they score higher on tests. Studies show the power of
concentration is increased for up to 4 hours a er a 20-minute walk!
Environmental well-being
Up to 25% of the morning rush hour traffic is attributed to the school commute. Reducing
the number of cars at schools improves air quality, creating healthier environments where
children spend a great part of their day.
Fun and happiness
Those who walk and cycle the school route enjoy a deeper connection to their community
and nd joy in nature and people along the way; all of which leads to less stress and less
depression.
Graduated independence
The walk to school provides a great opportunity for students to gradually know their
community and take incrementally greater responsibility for themselves and younger
children.

    “Waterloo Region is a safe and vibrant region. Every day, officers patrol our streets
    ensuring the safe travels of students. With School Resource Officers assigned to each
    school, WRPS is able to connect with students and respond to their needs
    immediately.”
                                                ~ Waterloo Regional Police Services Chief Brian Larkin
ParticipACTION knows the biggest risk is keeping
kids indoors
Encourage your children to engage more fully with their outdoor environments in a
variety of weather conditions. When children are supported to take risks, they have more
fun and learn how to assess and manage risk in all areas of their lives.
              This work is made possible in part through nancial support from
                 Green Communities Canada and the Government of Ontario.

