The Walk Zone
Students who reside in the walking area benefit from a daily walk (or bike, or skateboard, or scooter
ride) to school in many different ways
This simple journey can mean so much.
Your school board provides students with the opportunity to walk or cycle to school whenever possible
because it is a great choice for so many reasons.
Physical health
Walking or cycling to school regularly gives your child opportunities for daily physical activity that will
help him or her avoid chronic disease and develop healthy habits that may continue into later years.
ParticipACTION recommends that children accumulate several hours’ worth of light movement every
day. Walking to school is a perfect opportunity to get it; more than half the body’s muscles are designed
for walking; it is a natural movement that is virtually injury-free.
Mental focus
Students who get physical activity in the morning arrive at
school more alert and ready to learn – and studies show
they score higher on tests. Studies show the power of
concentration is increased for up to 4 hours after a 20-
minute walk!
Environmental well-being
Up to 25% of the morning rush hour traffic is attributed to
the school commute. Reducing the number of cars at
schools improves air quality, creating healthier environments
where children spend a great part of their day.
Fun and happiness
Those who walk and cycle the school route enjoy a deeper
connection to their community and find joy in nature and
people along the way; all of which leads to less stress and less depression.
Graduated independence
The walk to school provides a great opportunity for students to gradually know their community and take
incrementally greater responsibility for themselves and younger children.
Pilot Sites
Currently STSBHN, The County of Brant and the City of Brantford are partnering in a pilot project
funded by Green Communities Canada. The pilot consists of implementing School Travel Plans in a
total of six (6) school sites in Brantford and Brant. The pilot sites include: Cobblestone, North Ward,
Sacred Heart, St Basil, St Gabriel and Walter Gretzky. The pilot programs will run until June 2020.
If your school community would like to be included in our next phase of pilot sites, please
complete the request form below:
Resources
      Links to School Planning Toolkit
      ParticipACTION report card