Student Transportation Services of York Region                                                                                                           
  ACTIVE SCHOOL TRAVEL PROGRAMS
  Active School travel is an initiative geared towards encouraging families to choose active transportation for the trip to and from school. Active transportation encourage school
  communities to walk, wheel (cycle, scoot, wheelchair, skate) or bus to and from school. Active transportation increases physical activity, improves physical, mental, and emotional health
  while also benefiting our environment.
  The Issues
        Childhood obesity rates are increasing;
        The number of students walking to school has been steadily decreasing over the past 25 years;
        Automobile dependency is contributing to increasing greenhouse gas emissions and negatively impacting the environment across Ontario.
  An Opportunity
  In working together, school administrators, teachers, parents, other school board staff, public health departments and municipalities can implement an Active School Program focussed on
  promoting active transportation. Green Communities' Canada Walks collaborates with organizations and schools across Canada to help support active school travel initiatives and manages
  the School Travel Planning process. The Active & Safe routes to school website contains numerous resources to support schools and communities which can be found under the useful
  links section.
  The Benefits
  There are so many benefits to having an Active and Safe Routes to School Program, including
        Improving student academic performance by making children more alert and better prepared to learn;
        Contributing to the daily goal of 60 minutes of moderate or vigorous activity for children, improving their health and overall fitness;
        Reducing traffic congestion and improving safety for everyone in school zones;
        Reducing Greenhouse gases emissions protecting environment;
        Promoting life-long habits that foster independence and active lifestyles, preparing children for their future.
  Watch and Learn More
  Kids Say Walking to School is Healthy, Fun and Good for the Environment
  How to Get Active on the Trip to School
  Useful Documents
  Going to School? Go Active!
  Helmet Safety Poster
  Heading to School? Walk Safe, Drive Safe, Be Safe Brochure
  School Success Stories
  Useful Links
  York Region Community and Health Services
  Ontario Active School Travel
  York Region Pedestrian Safety Campaign
  Metrolinx School Travel Infographics Campaign
  OPHEA Article - School Travel Planning in York Region
  York Region Transportation Videos
