Student Transportation
Student Transportation of Peel Region
Student Transportation of Peel Region is a consortium, formed by agreement between the
Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board and the Peel District School Board, for the purpose of
providing a common administration of transportation services for students residing in the Region
of Peel.
The STOPR website provides access to up-to-date information regarding delayed buses as well as
bus cancellations due to inclement weather. This website also contains transportation policies,
procedures, forms and frequently asked questions. Additionally, there is also a link from this
website to businfo.stopr.ca which provides information as to school of attendance and eligibility for
transportation. For more information, visit STOPR or for parent/student/general public inquiries,
call 905-890-6000 or 1-800-668-1140.
Parent Information on Return to School for September 2020
First Time Rider Safety Program
Stakeholder Responsibilities - City of Mississauga: Student Transportation and Students
Walking to School
A Stakeholder's Responsibility Breakdown was developed by the Mississauga Traffic Safety Council,
with input from the Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board and the Peel District School Board,
and adopted by the City of Mississauga Council on October 12, 2011. The document illustrates
jurisdictional responsibility related to student transportation and students walking to school in
Mississauga. 
Wellington-Dufferin Student Transportation Services (STWDSTS)
Transportation of students in the County of Du erin shall be provided by Wellington-Dufferin
Student Transportation Services. STWDSTS is the consortium that has been established by the
Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board and the Upper Grand District School Board, under the
Ministry of Education’s mandate, to provide transportation services for students within Dufferin
County. For more information, visit STWDSTS.

