
Active and Sustainable School
Transportation
City of Hamilton and Smart Commute Hamilton,
HWDSB promotes active and sustainable school
transportation. Active and Sustainable School
Transportation (ASST) can increase physical activity, reduce tra ic congestion, improve
air quality, enhance neighbourhood safety and instill a greater sense of community.
HWDSB has signed the Active and Sustainable School Transportation Charter
What is School Travel Planning?
School Travel Planning encourages communities to work together so that children living
within walking distance of school
 can walk or ride their bikes. The STP process involves students,
parents, teachers, principals, public health nurses and others as it examines challenges
and develops active travel solutions that may include:

       Walking school buses
       Buddy systems
       Route maps
       Fun walking events
       Park and walk locations
       Cycling education
       Tra ic-calmed streets and crosswalks
       School site safety measures
How can HWDSB communities get involved in ASST?
HWDSB encourages students, families, sta and community partners to work together on
active school transportation planning. Here are some ways they can do so:
1. Develop a School Travel Plan (STP)
An STP is both a policy document and a process. The STP process helps identify barriers
to active and sustainable transportation for each school, and it helps develop a school
specific written action plan.
2. Participate in Walking and Cycling Event Days
Hamilton Wear Yellow Days (WYD)
Celebrate the many benefits of walking and cycling to school, and raise awareness about
ASST.
       Wednesday, October 5, 2016 (International Walk to School Day) – 20th Anniversary
       Wednesday, February 1, 2017 (Winter Walk Day)
       Wednesday April 19, 2017 (Spring into Spring)

Bike to School Day
Schools can participate by biking to and from their school, or by joining the mass ride to
Hamilton’s Gore Park.
      Monday, May 29, 2017. Stay tuned for more information.
3. Nominate your school for a Community In Motion (CIM)
Award
This award recognizes e orts to actively promote and support walking, cycling, and
public transit use. Find more information on the Community in Motion Awards website.
      Deadline: Late fall 2016. To submit a nomination.
