
Important information about
student transportation
August 30, 2017 — As families prepare for back to school, it is a good time to
provide an update about student transportation.
This article describes:
     student transportation eligibility based on the distance from home to school
     courtesy riders
     how to check for eligibility and pick-up/drop-off locations
     links to more information
Providing safe, secure, on-time and cost-effective student transportation is the
goal of Tri-Board Student Transportation Services Inc. Tri-Board provides
transportation services to students of Hastings and Prince Edward District School
Board and other school boards.
Students may be eligible for transportation (busing) to and from school within the
allowable limits defined by Hastings and Prince Edward District School Board.
Student transportation eligibility*
     JK to Grade 6
          further than 1.6 km to school
          further than 0.8 km to the bus pick-up
     Grades 7 & 8
          further than 3.2 km to school
          further than 0.8 km to the bus pick-up
     Grades 9 – 12

          further than 3.2 km to school
          further than 1.6 km to the bus pick-up
*The distances may be adjusted for hazardous conditions or for students with
special needs.
Courtesy riders
Please be aware that transportation is not automatically provided to students who
attend optional programs—for example the Arts Program, Destinations, French
Immersion, or International Baccalaureate—and who live outside the boundary
area for the host school. However, if surplus space is available on existing bus
routes, students attending optional programs may be able to access transportation
as courtesy riders. The number and types of buses and routes are reviewed
annually due to ridership and route modifications in order to ensure an effective
and sustainable student transportation system. Changes occur from year to year,
which affect the amount of space available for courtesy riders.
How to check for transportation eligibility, pick-up and drop-off locations
Families can use an online look-up feature on the Tri-Board website to check for
transportation eligibility. Go to > hover over the Eligibility menu
item > click Transportation Eligibility Search > key in the information requested.
Families can also check pick-up and drop-off times for their child on the Tri-Board
website by scrolling to the Student Transportation Information at the bottom of
the page. For security purposes, you are required to provide the child’s Ontario
Education Number (OEN), birth date, school and grade.
More information

                         HPEDSB Policy 17: Transportation of Students (Pdf)
                         Tri-Board policies and procedures 
                         action=main.transportationPolicyAndProcedures, which includes topics
                         about:
                              Transportation application
                              Bus behavior expectations
                              Cancellations
                              Emergency administration of First Aid, CPR, EpiPens
                              Special circumstance transportation
                              Students with special needs requiring transportation
                              Transporting students with service animals
                              Use of electronic devices on school buses
                              Video surveillance
                              . . . and more
