   Active School Travel
Active school travel is a human powered means of getting to and from school. It includes:
      walking/jogging/running;
      cycling;
      in-line skating;
      skateboarding;
      non-mechanized wheelchairing; and
      snowshoeing/skiing.
Active school travel is a great way for children to be physically active, which is associated with
improved physical and mental health, while making school zones safer, by reducing traffic volumes
at and around schools. For more information on the benefits of active school travel, see School
Travel Planning: Introduction for Parents.
Information for Parents/Guardians
      Teaching Children to Walk Safely
      Tips for Walking Through the Seasons
      Tips to Encourage Safe Backpack Use
      Remember Your Walk to School Poster
      Active and Safe Routes to School Infographic
      Active School Travel Safety Tips
Information for Schools and Teachers
      Active School Travel Resource for Educators
      School Travel Planning Toolkit – A Guide for Facilitators
      Active and Safe Routes to School Infographic
      Liability from Active School Travel
North Grenville Active School Travel Project
North Grenville will receive a major boost with a new project thanks to the Ontario Active School
Travel Fund. The “North Grenville Way” project will increase opportunities for sustainable active
school travel. The one year initiative will raise awareness for active school travel, develop a
community charter, and conduct a professional assessment of walk zones. Visit the following link
for more information:
      North Grenville Receives $60 000 Boost for Active School Travel

Walking School Bus
A Walking School Bus is a group of children walking to school under the supervision of a trained
adult leader. Like a yellow school bus, the Walking School Bus follows a fixed and safe route with
designated “bus stops” and “pick up times”. Walking to school is not only a convenient and fun way
for your child to travel to school with their peers, but it also promotes a healthy and active lifestyle.

