               Transportation
                                When buses are cancelled SCDSB schools will remain open for student learning, as
                                in previous years. It is always a family decision whether or not it is safe for your
                                child(ren) to leave for school under severe weather conditions.
                                This year, please note that students who are unable to attend school due to
                                bus cancellations will be able to access learning materials on the digital learning
                                platform assigned by their teacher, either Desire2Learn (D2L) or Google Classroom.
                                Students in the Learn@Home program will continue with regular programming as
                                scheduled.
                                Simcoe County Student Transportation
                                Consortium
                                The Simcoe County Student Transportation Consortium (SCSTC) provides transportation
                                for approximately 35,000 out of a total of over 77,000 students enrolled in local school
                                boards. To contact the SCSTC please call 705-733-8965.
                                For information on walk and bus zones, special needs, out of area transportation and bus
                                stops, visit the SCSTC's website.
                                Policy No. 2410 - Transportation of Students
                                SCSTC Contact Info

                       
                            Inclement Weather Bus Cancellation
                            Information
                            For bus cancellation information, visit www.simcoecountyschoolbus.ca and follow
                            them on Twitter at @SCSTC_SchoolBus. For information regarding inclement
                            weather days during the 2020-21 school year, read the letter sent to families
                             on Nov. 24, 2020.
                            Which Inclement Weather Zone is my school in?
                            Look up your school on the SCSTC website or visit our Weather Zones page.
                            Staff Professional Development (PD) & Training
                            Cancellations on Bus Cancellation Days
                            If professional development (PD) is scheduled for in-person attendance and is in an
                            impacted weather zone(s), it will be cancelled for that/those zone(s) only. Staff from
                            those affected areas will need to determine whether it is safe to drive to the PD site. All
                            virtual learning sessions will occur regardless of inclement weather status.
                            Bus Cancellation Decision Process
                            The Simcoe County Student Transportation Consortium in conjunction with the bus
                            operators will make the decision to cancel school buses before the start of the school
                            day, usually before 6 a.m. The SCSTC will make every effort to post announcements
                            between 6 and 7 a.m. with the local radio stations, on the SCSTC website and on
                            SCSTC's Twitter. Parents should also note that inclement weather cancellations are
                            effective for the whole day and buses cancelled in the morning will not run at the end
                            of the day.
                              