Active & Safe Routes to School Pilot
The City of Toronto’s Active and Safe Routes to School pilot project began in 2018 and
encourages children to use active transportation such as walking, biking or scootering to
and from school, as well as improving safety in areas around schools. This project is one
of many initiatives under the city’s Vision Zero Road Safety Planand has received grants from Bloomberg Philanthropies’ Partnership for Healthy
Cities and Ontario Active School
Travel to continue the implementation and
promotion of this project.
According to the Canadian Physical Activity Guidelines, school-aged children and youth
are recommended to have at least 60 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity
and several hours of light physical activity every day. Only one-third of Canadian children
and youth currently walk or cycle to school. Many parents choose to drive their children
to school, which has been linked to more greenhouse gas emissions and an overall
decrease in children’s levels of physical activity.

In 2018, the Active and Safe Routes to School pilot project involved five schools at three
locations and included the installation of new road markings, sidewalk activity, stencils
and signage.
In 2020, the program will expand to three new schools.
This year, the project is being led by Toronto Public Health and the City’s Transportation
Services Division. It is funded in-part by Bloomberg Philanthropies’ Partnership for
Healthy Cities, a global network of 70 cities committed to saving lives by preventing non-
communicable diseases and injuries; and Ontario Active School Travel, an Ontario-wide
program delivered by Green Communities Canada which is dedicated to children’s
mobility, health and happiness. Bloomberg Philanthropies’ Partnership for Healthy Cities
provided $50,000 USD and Ontario Active School Travel granted $60,000 CAD to help
deliver this initiative.
  2018 Active & Safe Routes to School Pilot
   The main objectives of the 2018 Active & Safe Routes to School Pilot was to
   increase student participation in walking and cycling to school and increase safety
   along designated walking/biking routes to school. The pilot included road markings,
   sidewalk activity stenciling and installation of signage to encourage children to walk
   or bike to school and to help reduce vehicular speed and increase safety.
   The pilot was launched at three locations involving five schools

Sidewalk Activity Stenciling
Signage

Stop Stencil and Zebra Markings
The pilot project is based on the five ‘Es’ of an effective road safety strategy –
Engineering, Education, Enforcement, Engagement and Evaluation and is in addition
to a number of other Vision Zero initiatives focused on increasing back-to-school
safety in Toronto’s communities.
Benefits of Active School Travel
Improves your family’s health
Active school travel helps to meet the goal for school-aged children of at least 60
minutes per day of moderate to vigorous physical activity, which is linked with lower
body mass index and improved cardiovascular health.
Improve Safety
Reducing traffic volumes at bell times creates safer school zones for all students
and improving walking and cycling routes to school enhances the safety,
connectivity, and quality of life for the community as a whole.
Help the Environment
Reducing the
number of
children being
driven to school
improves air
quality and
reduces
associated risks
of lung and
cardiovascular
diseases. Air
pollution can also
impact cognitive
development:
children are
particularly
vulnerable,
experiencing
negative impacts
at lower levels of
exposure than
adults.
Influence and
Improve Student
Performance
Active school
travel helps with
physical activity
and supports healthy brain development, which can lead to improved learning and
academic outcomes. Mental health benefits include reduced stress, depression,
and anxiety, and increased happiness.
Learn how parents can promote walking to school.
Related Information
Ontario Active School Travel
Bloomberg Philanthropies Partnership for Healthy Cities
Physical Activity and Walking

