Understanding parents' school travel choices: A qualitative
study using the Theoretical Domains Framework

abstract
Traffic related air pollution is detrimental to health and creates a substantial attributablemortality burden. It is suggested that a shift from motorised transport to active forms oftravel will therefore have significant health benefits. Currently 46% of school journeys forprimary aged children are made by car and this figure has risen steadily. Understandingbarriers to active school travel (AST) is an important first step in developing behaviouralinterventions to increase active travel. The purpose of this study was to explore parents’experiences of school travel and their choices regarding travel mode with a focus onidentifying barriers and facilitators to AST.Twenty parents of primary school children (4–12 years) in the West Yorkshire regiontook part in semi-structured interviews regarding school travel, informed by the TheoreticalDomains Framework. Framework Analysis was used to identify key themes in thedata and to develop a comprehensive picture of parents' experiences of school travel atboth individual and structural levels.Distance was the biggest barrier to AST. Time constraints were reported as the main barrierto parents accompanying children in AST, while concerns about safety deterred parents fromallowing children to travel independently. The need to incorporate multiple jouneys, such asthe work commute and/or multiple school drop-offs, placed demands on parents' time, whiledifficulty getting children into local schools meant further to travel for a number of parents.Findings suggest that interventions to promote AST may be particularly effective if tailoredtowards working parents. However, also addressing factors such as distance to school andschool travel at a policy level may produce more significant shifts in behaviour.
1. Introduction
     Air quality is a key determinant of health with estimates suggesting that atributable mortality in the UK is equivalent to
40,000 deaths each year (Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs, 2015a; Royal College of Physicians, 2016).
Evidence shows links between air pollution and low birthweight (Laurent et al., 2014; Pedersen et al., 2013), adverse birth
outcomes (Ha et al., 2014; Olsson et al., 2013), cardiovascular illnesses (Brook et al., 2010; COMEAP, 2006; Newby et al.,
2014), stroke (Shah et al., 2015), respiratory disease and infection (Brunekreef and Holgate, 2002; Kampa and Castanas,
2008), and certain cancers (Beelen et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2008). Children are particularly vulnerable, with traffic related air
pollution linked to the onset of childhood asthma and reductions in lung function (Gauderman et al., 2015, 2000; Gehring
et al., 2013) and cognitive development (Freire et al., 2010; Porta et al., 2015; Sunyer et al., 2015). However, inequalities exist
in exposure to air pollution; with children living in deprived areas experiencing higher concentrations (Barnes and Chat-
terton, 2016; Marshall et al., 2009; Mitchell and Dorling, 2003; Walker et al., 2003) and therefore a greater risk of the
associated health consequences.
    A decrease in motor vehicle use, alongside increased uptake of lower emission vehicles, could significantly reduce the
number of premature deaths and overall disease burden resulting from air pollution (Maizlish et al., 2013; Woodcock et al.,
2009). A shift to more sustainable, and specifically more active, modes of transport brings other health benefits, in particular
increasing physical activity and reducing sedentary time. Most children and adults in the UK do not currently meet physical
activity recommendations (Health and Social Care Information Centre, 2014) despite the associated health risks (World
Health Organization, 2010). Studies suggest that children and adults who regularly engage in active travel have higher levels
of physical activity than those who do not (Cooper et al., 2005; Faulkner et al., 2009; van Sluijs et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2012)
which may be a consequence of incorporating these additional opportunities to be active into the normal day. The school
commute offers one opportunity to reduce vehicle emissions and incorporate physical activity into a daily routine by
walking or cycling to school. In the UK more than a third of school journeys are made by car, with half of primary aged
children driven to school (Department for Transport, 2014). If we are to develop effective interventions to promote active
travel then it is important to understand the factors which influence choice of travel to school.
    Previous conceptual frameworks of school travel have put forward a number of individual, social and environmental
factors that directly and indirectly impact upon behaviour (McMillan, 2005; Panter et al., 2008). Socio-demographic factors
such as a child's gender (Davison et al., 2008; Panter et al., 2008; Stewart, 2011), age (Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008; Davison
et al., 2008; Su et al., 2013), ethnicity (Bere et al., 2008; Chillón et al., 2014; Davison et al., 2008), and socio-economic
background (Davison et al., 2008; Stewart, 2011; Su et al., 2013) have all been found to influence rates of AST. Similarly
parents' socio-economic status (Stewart, 2011; Su et al., 2013), employment status (Stewart, 2011) and car ownership
(DiGuiseppi et al., 1998; Timperio et al., 2006; Zhu and Lee, 2009) have been found to be positively associated with car use
and/or negatively associated with walking to school. A review of environmental determinants of active travel by Panter et al.
(2008) suggested that safer routes, including appropriate crossings and less busy roads, and shorter routes were positively
associated with walking and cycling in young people between 5 and 18 years old. Together this research suggests that
developing interventions to promote active travel is complex and consideration needs to be given to both individual and
environmental influences on behaviour.
    A futher complexity is that school travel behaviours involve parent-child dyads. Decisions on travel mode for the school
commute are impacted upon by parents and children and their responses to multiple other factors. Succesfully carrying out
the chosen behaviour requires cooperation from both indicating that a shift in travel behaviour from motorised travel to AST
will involve a change in behaviour by parents and children. However, while the level of influence of a child in the decision
making process will undoutedly vary between families, it can be assumed that for children of primary school age it is
parents who act as the ultimate decision makers. It could therefore be argued that parents' perceived barriers to AST are
likely to have greater influence than children's on choice of travel mode.
    A number of studies have attempted to identify what barriers parents experience to AST. Distance, and concerns about
safety have consistently been found to be the most common barriers (Carlson et al., 2014; Chillón et al., 2014; Martin and
Carlson, 2005; Panter et al., 2013; Yeung et al., 2008). However, the majority have been correlational studies employing
quantitative measures and while this has facilitated the identification of common factors that predict AST, it fails to provide
the narrative needed to help better interpret this information (Davison et al., 2008). Fewer studies have explored parents'
experiences of factors, how they interact, and how they influence decision making around school travel. Few qualitative
studies exploring parents' choices regarding school travel have been published. Those that have reinforce the idea that
school travel behaviour is affected by multiple levels of influence but have suggested that potential barriers are perceived,
experienced and responded to differently by parents (Ahlport et al., 2008; Faulkner et al., 2010; Greves et al., 2007; Zuniga,
2012).
    These findings may help to account for the limited success of interventions aimed at reducing car use and increasing
active travel for school (Arnott et al., 2014; Chillón et al., 2011; Davison et al., 2008; Ogilvie et al., 2007). It has been
suggested that intervention designs too rarely account for context or incorporate input from the intended target populations
(Arnott et al., 2014; Ogilvie et al., 2007). Which may mean they are less effective. The range of variables found to impact
upon school travel is broad and it is likely that different communities experience these factors differently. In order to
develop effective AST interventions, and identify target populations for these interventions, it is necessary to understand
what barriers and facilitators are experienced by different groups and how those barriers and facilitators are experienced
and negotiated.
    Interventions also require a strong theoretical basis (Arnott et al., 2014; Chillón et al., 2011) to ensure that they correctly
target mechanisms of behaviour change. An important part of this process is completing a theoretical assessment of target
behaviours in order to include all relevant constructs and discount irrelevant ones (Michie et al., 2005). The Theoretical
Domains Framework (TDF; Michie et al., 2005) provides an integrative framework which incorporates a number of
constructs from a range of behavioural theories (Fig. 1). By making theories more accessible, the resultant domains allow
researchers to build up an understanding of behaviours in context and identify potential target areas for intervention. The
TDF may be particularly appropriate for use in research into AST given the breadth and range of influencing factors sug-
gested by the literature.
    Understanding of barriers and facilitators to AST is crucial for targeting and developing successful interventions. Families
in deprived areas are at greatest risk from the health impacts of transport and yet little research has explored these issues in
depth with these populations in the UK. Similarly little has been done ro explore cultural or ethinic differences in school
travel behaviour. The aim of this study was to identify factors that impact upon parents' choices regarding school travel in a
UK population, with a focus on the key barriers to and facilitators of AST. Furthermore, the study aimed to build a comprehensive
picture of school travel from a multicultural sample of parents of primary school children living in urban areas
across West Yorkshire – a region with some of the poorest air quality in the UK (Department for Environment Food and
Rural Affairs, 2015b) and fewer people meeting physical activity guidelines than the national average (55.5% vs 57%, Sport
England, 2015). Using a qualitative approach based upon the TDF, this study looked to provide a strong theoretical basis for
future intervention development.
2. Method
2.1 Design
    Semi structured interviews were conducted with parents of primary school aged childen to explore their opinions on and
experiences of the school commute and using active travel for school journeys.
2.2 Participants
    Parents of children aged 4–12 years living in the West Yorkshire region of the UK and attending participating urban
primary schools were recruited between May and July 2015. The sampling strategy was to recruit mothers and/or fathers of
primary school children who were of varying ages, were attending schools across the area, and who travelled to school using
different modes of transport. Sampling also aimed to be representative of the ethnic diversity of the region and so a
combination of purposive sampling and convenience sampling were used (Ritchie and Lewis, 2003). Purposive sampling
was supported by a sampling matrix. The three ethnic categories used were white British, Asian/Asian British, and other. The
three child age groups used were 4–6 years, 7–9 years and 10–12 years, and the school travel categories were car driven,
public transport and active travel.
2.3 Recruitment
    Eight primary schools in West Yorkshire situated near busy roads or in areas with congestion issues were approached by
local authority teams to participate; six schools agreed. Schools either distributed letters and study information sheets
directly to parents and collected any response sheets (3 schools) or provided an opportunity for the researcher to present
the study at a parents' forum where parents could be invited to participate (3 schools).
    All parents received a letter, study information sheet and response form and were asked to return the form to the school,
or to the researcher directly if they wished to participate. Response forms included demographic questions and a question
about regular school travel mode (“How does your child normally get to school?”). Parents were then contacted to arrange a
convenient time and venue for the interview and given the opportunity to ask questions about the study. Immediately
before the interviews, parents were asked to sign a consent form to confirm that they were happy to take part.
2.4 Theoretical framework and topic guide
    A semi-structured topic guide was developed using the TDF and previous literature (McMillan, 2005; Panter et al., 2008)
comprising questions that explored influential factors for transport choices and school travel behaviours. It included general
questions about the school journey as well as ones relating more specifically to active travel, shaped by the TDF domains
(Fig. 2). Factors which have previously been found to impact on school travel mode were incorporated into questions where
appropriate and used to develop prompts which researchers could use to elicit more in depth responses from participants.
The guide was developed by the research team which included behaviour change researchers. The final guide was reviewed
by the team and piloted with two parents prior to data collection to ensure relevance and clarity of the questions.
2.5 Procedure
    Face to face interviews were conducted using the topic guide and lasted an average of 29 min (range 17–65 min). At the
end of the interview all particpants received a d10 high street voucher as compensation for their time. Interviews were
recorded using a digital recorder and were transcribed verbatim.
2.6 Ethical approval
    This study was approved by the University of Leeds School of Psychology Ethics Committee (ref no: 15-0093; date
approved: 07-Apr-2015).
3. Analysis
    Transcripts were analysed using Framework analysis (Ritchie and Spencer, 1994) guided by the TDF. The analysis was
conducted by two experienced researchers (SA and RM) and involved a five stage process (Pope et al., 2000).
3.1 Familiarisation
    Transcripts were read and re-read by both researchers so that contextual and reflective notes could be made in-
dependently. This also allowed the researchers to comment on the initial fit of the data to the framework.
3.2 Coding and indexing
    Some initial open coding then took place on ten of the transcripts, conducted by both researchers individually. The text
was labelled according to emerging themes in an effort to capture those that were unexpected and those that fitted the
existing framework. Disagreements regarding initial themes were resolved through discussion until joint consensus was
reached. This involved combining and/or renaming existing themes. Coding was then completed on the remaining transcripts.
The new codes were grouped and incorporated into the domains of the framework as subheadings and given an
index number. Transcripts were then read line by line and where appropriate index numbers were applied. Indexing was
completed by both researchers independently on ten of the 20 transcripts followed by a discussion to reach consensus. Any
further adaptations to the framework were then made before it was applied to the remaining transcripts. Indexing was
completed by SA.
3.3 Charting
    Following indexing, a spreadsheet was used to develop a matrix of the domains and subdomains. Data were charted onto
the matrix by extracting quotes directly into the relevant categories. This allowed researchers to retain the context and
language of the interviews. This matrix was then condensed to show all quotes by category.
3.4 Interpretation
    Following generation of the final matrix, discussion was had around the main concepts emerging from the data. Researchers
attempted to identify and map interactions between the domains and describe these relationships. This also
allowed the key behavioural determinants to be highlighted and grouped as barriers or facilitators to the target behaviours.
4. Results
    20 interviews were undertaken; eight were conducted in schools, ten took place at participants' homes, and two took
place at participants' places of work at their request. Participants were 18 mothers, and two fathers. Of these, 10 were of
White British, seven were Pakistani, one was Indian, and two were of mixed ethnicity. All interviews were conducted in
English with most taking place one to one (n = 15). However, two group interviews were conducted at the request of the
participants; one group of three and a pair. The majority of parents had more than one child (n = 16) and most had three or
more (n = 9). Half of parents had just one child of primary school age (n = 10) and only one parent had more than two
children in this age group. Eight parents normally drove their children to school, 10 children walked and two caught buses.
No children regularly cycled to school, but this appeared to be representative of selected schools. Levels of relative deprivationwere established using participant postcodes and the Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD; Department for Com-
munities and Local Government, 2015). Half lived in areas ranked as the ‘most deprived’ in England (IMD = 1, n = 10), seven
lived in areas categorised as ‘more deprived’ (IMD = 2–4), one lived in an area of ‘average’ deprivation (IMD = 5), one in an
area ranked as ‘less deprived’ (IMD = 6) and one lived in an area considered to be one of the ‘least deprived’ in the country
(IMD = 10).
    Guided by the TDF informed topic guide parents were encouraged to discuss a range of issues related to walking and
cycling to school. Emergent themes shaped by the populated domains of the framework are discussed below along with
barriers and facilitators to AST which were identified from parental reports. Sample quotes for each of the themes and
related domains are presented in Table 1. Table 2 provides a summary of the key barriers and facilitators to AST.
4.1 Complexity of school travel choices
    School travel behaviour was rarely constant and most children, at least ocassionally, varied their mode of travel (Table 1.1.
ai). Parents described two distinct issues relating to AST. First the importance of having a parent or other trusted adult
accompanying children in active travel (escorted AST) and second, children's capability to be independently mobile to
engage in unescorted AST. Decisions relating to these issues preceded those of travel mode. A range of different and
overlapping barriers and facilitators emerged (Table 2). Walking appeared to be the most salient AST option, with many
parents seemingly never having considered cycling as a possible alternative despite more than half of children owning bikes.
Only two of the 20 parents had children who had at some point cycled to school.
    Overall many of the same issues were expressed by parents with regards to school travel, yet it was evident that parents'
responses to these issues could vary and this was reflected in parents' school travel choices. Furthermore, there were a
number of cases where parents with primary aged children who engaged in AST had other children at secondary school who
were driven highlighting the complexity of school travel behaviour within families.
4.2 Knowledge, beliefs and motivation around AST
    Irrespective of usual travel mode, parents were aware of some of the potential benefits of active travel (Table 1.2.bi) and
many made reference to the contribution it could make to children’s physical activity levels. However, parents were much
less likely to comment on possible benefits to air quality with few demonstrating any awareness of local air quality issues
(Table 1.2.bii). Overall attitudes to AST were positive (Table 1.2.ciii) with the general consensus being that walking would be
parents’ choice for their children, provided that other factors permitted.
    Parents were confident they knew the fastest and safest routes for AST and in some cases the two were distinct from each
other. The types of routes considered safest depended on whether parents were focused on accompanied AST, or their child
travelling independently (Table 1.1aiii). Parents were more likely to consider the busy, main road routes as safe for unescorted
AST because they felt this kept their child visible. This was related to parents' fears about their childs’ safety when travelling
unaccompanied to school (Table 1.2e), particularly regarding possible threat posed by strangers (Table 1.2.ciii). Parents who
accompanied children in walking to school tended to avoid busy roads where possible in order to evade traffic and careless
drivers which they considered the greater risks (Table 1.2.bii). These assessments of risk appeared to be based on parents' beliefs
about the potential consequences of a travel behaviour and the recall of salient events locally such as road traffic accidents.
4.3 Actual and perceived capability to engage in AST
    Of those parents whose children did consistently walk or take the bus to school, most reported that they were not able to
drive or did not have access to a car. Lacking driving skills or the means to drive children to school therefore emerged as the
most significant determinant of consistent active travel or use of public transport.
    Irrespective of travel mode, parents spoke at length about children's road safety skills with some also making reference
to children's general abilities to keep themselves safe (Table 1.3.f.i). These skills seemed to be central to parents' perceptions
of how capable their children were of walking to and from school. Concerns that children lacked these skills prevented
parents from permitting unescorted AST (Table 2) and the majority of parents believed that children would not be ready for
independent travel until secondary school. Conversely, these concerns did not prevent parents from allowing children to
walk when accompanied by an adult. This was demonstrated by the number of parents who reported concerns but whose
children currently walked to school.
    Some parents also felt that their children lacked the necessary cycling skills (Table 1.3.f.ii) or stamina (Table 1.3.g.ii) to
cycle to school and again this was associated with concerns about safety. Other parents reported that their children had
completed cycle training through school. However, none of these children were currently cycling to school and, in most
cases, had never made the journey by bike. This would suggest that while developing children's cycling skills may improve
parents' attitudes towards cycling to school, there are additional reasons why children don't do so.
    Many parents felt that their choice of school travel mode was dictated by circumstances, demonstrating a lack of perceived
behavioural control (Table 1.3.g.ii); this was particularly apparent amongst parents who currently drove children to
school. The perceived necessity of driving was often at odds with parents' aspiration for children to walk to school but given
a number of environmental barriers parents saw no practical alternatives. Parents whose children walked unaccompanied
described their methods for ensuring that children were able to travel safely (Table 1.3.f.iii). Helping children to develop
their skills around road safety and personal safety and allowing them to walk themselves to and from school was considered
by these parents to be an important part of building their independence (Table 1.2.d.ii and Table 1.3.f.ii) and emerged as a
facilitator of unescorted AST (Table 2).
4.4 Parents' roles and their social support
    Parents felt responsible for getting children to and from school safely (Table 1.4.h.i), but for some that responsibility was
shared with a co-parent, grandparent, older child or child-minder (Table 1.4.i.i). For a number of working parents, this
additional social support appeared to be vital to facilitate AST. For parents whose children walked to school without an
adult, their role seemed to evolve from one of chaperone to one of monitor (Table 1.4.h.ii). Parents described a brief stage of
following their children from a distance to ensure they reached school safely, or routinely calling children via mobile telephones
during the journey to track their progress.
     For most, the norm at their child’s school was for children to walk, with others reporting an even mix of walking and
driving (Table 1.4.i.ii). Most parents were not aware of any children currently cycling to school. Generally, parents did not
appear to feel influenced by other parents’travel choices, differentiating between their circumstances and the perceived
circumstances of others. Nor did parents report feeling any social pressure from friends or family to opt for one travel mode
over another.
     A number of parents reported strategies schools had used to promote AST, including school and parent led walking buses
and cycle training. Walking buses were reported to be short lived and not sustained by the schools. Children enjoyed cycling
training, but this did not appear to result in an increase in cycling to school amongst those children who participated. A
number of schools had tried to tackle some of the issues resulting from the number of children driven to school. This had
involved posting teachers outside of the school at drop-off and pick-up times or communicating with parents via letters and
newsletters in an attempt to reduce dangerous parking around the school site. Again parents reported limited success
suggesting the school did not have sufficient power to enforce parking rules.
4.5 Environmental and policy influences
     By far the most commonly reported reasons for low levels of AST related to issues of parents’ environmental contexts.
4.5.1 Distance and time
     Distance of home from school emerged as the most significant environmental factor (Table 1.5.j.i). In general parents
whose children walked to school reported living close by with a walk of only a few minutes (range of 2–20 min). For those
who lived further away, children were likely to be driven unless parents did not drive or have access to a car. Where a walk
would take over 20 min these parents tended to opt for taking the bus which was related to parents' perceptions of children's
capacity to walk that distance. For a small number of parents the issue of distance between home and school was the
result of children not being allocated places at their school of choice but at another school significantly futher away.
     Another factor, often exacerbated by distance, was time constraints. Many parents reported having to incorporate more
than one trip into their school journey. In many cases this included their work commute (Table 1.5.j.ii), getting other
children to and from different schools, and/or getting children to after school activities. Having to make multiple trips
seemed to be highly related to taking the car, particularly where parents had to travel on to work. Parents reported that the
car was most convenient as it saved time, and for some was seen as the only option allowing them to arrive at work on time
due to conflicting school and work start times.
4.5.2 Traffic
     All parents were concerned about unsafe levels of traffic on the route to school and/or around the school site (Table 1:5.j.
iii) and this was seen as a key barrier to unescorted AST and/or cycling to school. In addition to traffic volume, parents
described having witnessed dangerous driving including speeding around their child's school (Table 1.5.j.iv), which again
contributed to concerns around road safety. Traffic was by far the biggest contributor to parents' concerns around safety due
to fears of children being involved in accidents.
4.5.3 Infrastructure
     Parents reported feeling more confident in their child's ability to negotiate the school route when there were fewer roads
to cross or where appropriate crossings were provided. Where parents were discussing unescorted AST, many felt that they
would be more confident when traffic lighted crossings were accompanied by a crossing guard (lollipop person; Table 1.5.j.
v). Most parents felt there was a significant issue with parking around their child’s school. Parents who drove felt there was
insufficient parking and some were actually put off from driving children to school as a result suggesting in some cases a
lack of parking near school may facilitate AST (Table 2). However, many parents felt that the situation around school parking
presented a safety issue for those children walking to school by making it difficult to cross safely (Table 1.5.j.vi) suggesting it
may also discourage parents from allowing unescorted AST (Table 2).
     Issues of infrastructure appeared more salient when parents were considering cycling to school (Table 1.5.j.vi). A number
of parents reported that the route would not appropriately accommodate children cycling which added to the potential
dangers. Similarly, schools did not appear to provide adequate storage facilities for bikes. Two parents who had previously
allowed children to cycle to school reported this as the main barrier to cycling (Table 2). However, amongst a number of
parents there was a lack of awareness of bike storage (Table 1.2.biv).
4.5.4 Weather and resources
     Weather was mentioned as a factor that impacted upon the school journey and for a small number of parents this
significantly influenced travel mode (Table 1.5.j.vii). For some, bad weather made travelling to school by motorised transport
(car, bus or taxi) more likely. For others, nice weather could prompt a shift in the opposite direction. However, the impact of
weather was ususally related to what resources parents had available to allow them to alternate between travel modes. For
example, parents could only use the car as an alternative where they had access to a car, and this included having the funds
to pay for a taxi. Similarly, parents were more likely to see walking as a viable option when they had sufficient time to allow
them the opportunity, and children had the appropriate outdoor clothing to allow them to walk comfortably in inclement
weather. This suggests that weather and access to resources can mediate the relationship between behavioural intention
and actual travel behaviour. With regards to cycling, more than half of children owned bikes while only two had ever cycled
to school suggesting that whilst having access to a bike is clearly necessary, it is not a sufficient facilitator for cycling to
school.
4.6 Demographic influences
    As a result of purposive sampling methods overall rates of driving and AST did not differ by child’s age or ethnicity. Nor
was there any suggestion from parents that boys and girls travelled differently or that gender influenced parents' decisions
around school travel. However, it was clear that children's age had a strong influence on unescorted AST and that this was
related to parents' perceptions of children's skills and abilities. Of the four children that had walked to school without an
adult, all were aged nine or above and all were White British. None of the South Asian primary school children had ever
travelled to school without an adult although reasons for this were not explicit. Parents whose children walked to school
without an adult demonstrated an awareness of the possible risks of them doing so. There were, however, distinctly fewer
reports of fears and worries amongst these parents. All expressed confidence in their children’s abilitites and an aim of
preparing children for independent travel to and from secondary school.
    Half of parents were in employment and of these five regularly drove children to school, four had social support which
meant children were at least occasionnally accompanied in active travel to school, and one was able to walk with their child
as they worked at the same school with corresponding hours. By contrast, the vast majority of parents whose children were
accompanied to school were not in employment and were mainly made up of South Asian mothers. Discounting distance,
being a working parent was the most commonly reported reason for driving children to school.
5. Discussion
    The results of this study highlight the complexity of school travel behaviours and the range of individual and structural
influences on parents' choices of travel mode. For most parents, mode choice can be relatively changeable in response to
fluctuations in context, such as the availability of time, material and social resources. This supports assertions that there is a
greater degree of flexibility in people's travel behaviour than is normally assumed (Chatterton et al., 2015) and that this
existing flexibility might be exploited in order to promote more lasting shifts in behaviour.
    Walking was the preferred mode of AST, with few considering cycling as an option and there was a clear distinction
drawn between children walking with and without an adult chaperone, with a strong preference for the latter for primary
aged children. Findings suggest a distinct set of school travel behaviours with separate and overlapping individual, social
and environmental barriers and facilitators and these have been incorporated into a conceptual framework shown in Fig. 3.
Unlike previous models of school travel this framework highlights the role of parents’ perceptions as barriers to AST, and
attempts to show how these perceptions interact with environmental barriers. However, it is worth noting that while this
model offers a ‘good fit’ for the majority of the current sample, for a small number of parents certain factors, such as distance
or lack of access to a car, were particularly dominant, limiting choice and reducing flexibility in terms of travel mode.
5.1 Escorted school travel: motor travel vs AST
    Distance and time constraints were the most commonly reported barriers to escorted active travel, and in a number of
cases were highly related. Children who walked to school lived within a 20 min walk of the school site, and in most cases the
journey was much shorter. However, children whose parents also needed to make the journey to work or make additional
school drop-offs were more likely to be driven, particularly when they lived some distance from the school. Distance has
consistently been found to be a commonly cited reason for driving children to school and/or children not engaging in AST
(Ahlport et al., 2008; Faulkner et al., 2010; Garrard, 2011). In recent years the length of school journeys has increased by
nearly a quarter (Department for Transport, 2014). This has coincided with the introduction and strengthening of the role of
parents' choice in school selection as well as increased autonomy within the school sytem itself. The average primary school
journey in the UK is now 1.6 miles, further than the 1 mile journey most parents seem willing for primary aged children to
make on foot (Chillón et al., 2015). This suggests that at a structural level current policies around school selection may be a
significant influential factor on levels of AST. The role of the school system is further reinforced by reports from parents that
failure to get children into a local school, or to get multiple children into the same school has meant travelling greater
distances and/or increased the number of necessary trips. Lack of sufficient places at local schools and schools admissions
policies which emphasise factors other than ease of travel may also be impacting on school travel behaviour.
    One of the most commonly reported demands on parents was getting to work on time, which often meant integrating
the work and school commutes into a single journey. Within the current sample, working parents were much less likely to
accompany their children in active travel, opting instead to drive. Where working parents were able to walk their children to
and from school, this was because their working hours allowed for it and did not conflict with the normal school day. This
supports findings from previous research that convenience is an important factor in parents' decision making around school
travel mode (Ahlport et al., 2008; Faulkner et al., 2010). Linking other trips into the school journey was an important factor
in the perceived convenience of taking the car. In addition to the work commute, taking children to after school activities
and appointments necessitated this.
    It is, however, important to acknowledge that the perceived convenience of car travel does not in itself act as a barrier to
AST. Amongst current participants there were a number of working parents who used the car for the work commute but
whose children walked to school at least several days a week. In most cases this was because parents had access to some
level of social support, either family or a paid child-minder, who could take on the responsibility of walking the child to
school. In a small number of cases it was because children made their own way to school on foot. For all of these parents
dropping children at school in the car was seen as the least convenient option given alternatives that allowed them to
bypass the school journey completely. The variability in travel decisions between parents, and between days at an individual
level, reinforces Zuniga’s (2012) assertion that the impact of potential barriers can vary according to a parent’s approach.
Successful negotiation of barriers depends on parents’ capacity and inclination. This might indicate that building working
parents’ capacity by providing them with support for the school run, or making unescorted travel a favourable alternative
could increase rates of AST.
5.2 Unescorted active school travel
    The choice to allow children to walk to school without an adult was uncommon within our sample. Only a small number
of parents had permitted children to do so and this was facilitated by parents' belief that children could travel safely, and a
desire to build children’s independence before the transition to secondary school. There was a tendency for parents to
consider children of primary age too young to make the journey without a chaperone, believing them to be lacking the
necessary skills to negotiate the route to school and fearing the risk from strangers and road traffic accidents. In line with
other studies (Chillón et al., 2015; Mammen et al., 2012) concern about child safety was a significant barrier to unescorted
AST, and reflects a significant downward trend in children's independent mobility across recent decades. In England, rates of
walking home from school unaccompanied amongst primary age children have fallen from 86% in 1971, to 25% in 2010
(Shaw et al., 2015). This significant drop has been driven by fewer 7–8 year olds being allowed to make the journey unaccompanied
(80% 1971, 6% 2010), demonstrating that children are being given this independence much later than ever
before. This has led to an increase not only in the number of children being driven to school, but also in rates of children
being accompanied in AST. This supports, in part, Faulkner et al.’s (2010) assertion that safety considerations impact on
escort decisions rather than choices of travel mode.
    In this study, the necessity for children's school travel to be chaperoned seemed to be driven purely by perceptions of
danger for the child, particularly from traffic. Speeding and inattentive driving en route and around the school site were a
major concern. A lack of confidence in children’s road safety skills was a key barrier to unescorted AST. It has been suggested
that restricting independence delays, rather than removes, risk and that allowing children increasing levels of independence
in their travel may be an important opportunity to ‘develop and consolidate' skills (Shaw et al., 2015). Furthermore, when
independent mobility is limited, so too are children’s opportunities to demonstrate their capabilities to parents.
    Reductions in the number of road accidents involving young children may suggest that parents' perceptions of road
traffic risk is inflated. However, fewer accidents may simply reflect changes in travel behaviour (Hillman et al., 1990). For
example, there has been a reduction in independent mobility in this age group which may have reduced their involvement
in accidents. This possibility is supported by the steep increase in pedestrian injuries and fatalities between the 8–11 year
age band and 12–15 year band, when children enjoy much more freedom of movement (Department for Transport, 2013).
However, it is important to consider that accident rates and therefore actual risk can differ across neighbourhoods and that
parents' perceptions can be influenced by their location. Neighbourhoods characterised by less traffic danger have been
found to be associated with increased rates of independent mobility. In the case of the current sample living in urban,
densely populated areas, high perceptionss of risk from traffic may have some basis in reality. Improving parent's perceptions
of route safety by addressing traffic issues or providing safer crossings near schools may therefore be of equal or
greater importance than improving children's road safety skills. This is because, by improving the perceived safety of the
route to school, it is likely that parents’ confidence in children's ability to negotiate that route will increase. Changes in
infrastructure may be particularly relevant for children’s cycling. Parents have been found to prefer substantially segregated
cycle routes for primary aged children, contrasting with the traditional approach to cycling infrastructure found in the UK
(Aldred, 2015). However, individuals’ perceptions of cycling risk involve attributions of competence and infrastructure and
are influenced by wider social perceptions of risk (Manton et al., 2016). Addressing the collective perception of cycling as
unattainable may therefore be necessary in order to shift travel norms, and a combination of structural and population level
interventions may be more likely to promote cycling (Spotswood et al., 2015).
5.3 Moderators and mediators
    Previous research has demonstrated that both child and parent socio-demographics can impact upon children's school
travel behaviour. Within the current sample, there were no obvious cultural or ethnic differences in the factors that influencedparents' choices of travel mode. Barriers and facilitators were common to both White British and South Asian
parents. However, South Asian mothers reported walking their children to school more frequently and this seemed to be
related to the fact that fewer South Asian mothers were in full time employment. Similarly, none of the South Asian parents
reported children having made the journey independently, but again this might reflect that more South Asian mothers had
the opportunity to escort their children to school and unescorted travel was not a neccessity. Whether or not parents
worked, together with car ownership, seemed to be the only significant socio-economic influences on travel mode choice.
Even where parents who had access to a car did not generally drive children to school, having a car available meant that
driving could be seen as a ‘backup’, particularly in bad weather. Working parents who drive may therefore be a potential
target population for intervention.
    Whereas previous studies have found that boys are more likely to engage in active travel and demonstrate more freedom
in mobility (Davison et al., 2008; O’Brien et al., 2000; Panter et al., 2008; Prezza et al., 2001; Stewart, 2011), this study found
no difference between genders. Gender did not appear to factor into parents' decision making for primary aged children.
However, age did emerge as an important aspect of parents' reasoning, given their tendency to use it as an indication of
children's ability to make the journey to school independently. Parents saw the transition to secondary school as a cue for
children's readiness to engage in unescorted AST. However, given that the largest proportion of road accidents amongst
children happen in this age group (Keep and Rutherford, 2013) there may be a need to cement their skills in independent
travel before they make this move.
5.4 Strengths and limitations
    The current study had a number of strengths including (1) the involvement of a multicultural sample of parents living in
predominantly deprived areas, and (2) the recruitment of parents with a range of current school travel behaviours. Including
a diverse sample, with children from across primary school age groups, is novel and addresses limitations of previous
research. A further strength of the study is its use of a theoretical framework for data collection and analysis. The TDF acted
as a guide to discussions with parents, enabling questioning on specific factors relating to AST, without limiting the breadth
of exploration of school travel behaviours. The use of the TDF as part of a robust framework analysis also provided insights
beyond simply identifying key factors in the travel choices parents make. It highlighted interactions between those factors
and offered additional detail regarding those interactions. For instance, rather than simply pointing to a relationship between
age and levels of unescorted AST, the TDF revealed how age was related to parents perceptions that younger children
lack the necessary skills to travel unaccompanied, and how this in turn was related to concerns about safety and fear of
accidents. This should help interventions to identify key areas to target.
    While the nature of the current sample can be seen as a strength of this study, it may also be a limitation. A multicultural
sample such as this one is representative of the West Yorkshire population, but it may not be representative of other areas.
Similarly, the current sample included areas of high deprivation. Given that findings suggest interventions might be best
targeted at working parents, this could indicate that less deprived communities will benefit more from intervention given
higher rates of employment. Further qualitative studies should therefore be conducted with middle-income parents who are
likely to have higher rates of car ownership and a greater proportion of two-working-parent families. A final limitation of
the study is that it included parents but did not involve children. As previously discussed school travel behaviours involve
parent-child dyads and it is possible that the current investigation has missed factors unique to the child's experience.
However, qualitative studies that have involved children have shown significant commonality in the barriers they report,
and those reported by parents (Ahlport et al., 2008; Kirby and Inchley, 2009). Furthermore, in children of primary age,
choices of travel mode and restrictions on travel are most likely to come from parents.
6. Conclusions
    There are a number of implications for areas for intervention and future research provided by the findings of this study.
Firstly, working parents have emerged as a promising target group for intervention to promote AST, given the high car use in
this population. At a structural level, providing parents with flexible working arrangements may allow them the option to
accompany children in AST. However, given that many parents rely on use of the car for the work commute, and the
convenience of making a single onward journey, this may not be sufficient to promote a change in behaviour. Instead,
providing some level of social support, in the form of other adults who can take on responsibility for getting children to
school, may facilitate increases in escorted AST. To date, these types of interventions have been predominantly school led
and have focused on the provision of walking school bus programmes (Chillón et al., 2011). Both the literature and parents
themselves report limited success of walking buses, and parents' reports suggest this could be a result of poor targeting and
dependence on volunteer chaperones. Successful interventions will need to consider accessibility and sustainability as part
of the development process.
    Encouraging working parents to consider unescorted AST, for those in older age groups at least, is also likely to produce
significant shifts in behavior. Findings suggest that interventions should focus on reducing concerns about children's safety
on the way to school and increasing confidence in children’s ability to make the journey without an adult. Interventions that
aim to improve children's road safety skills and/or improve safety of the route may therefore be beneficial. However, before
developing strategies, research should look to establish how well parents' perceptions reflect reality, with regards to both
children’s abilities and the risks to children en route.
    The potential role of structural level interventions has been further supported by the findings of this study. Distance is
clearly one of the most influential issues for parents regarding school travel, with shorter distances facilitating both escorted
and unescorted AST. At an individual level, parents are limited in what actions they can take to reduce the length of the
school journey. However, local and school level policies which emphasise school travel in relation to admissions are likely to
facilitate shorter journeys. Policies relating to spatial planning can also impact upon distance as well as the safety of routes
to school. Planning policies which prioritise sustainable school travel in decisions on school sitings, both in terms of new
school developments and the expansions of existing school sites, may therefore provide significant shifts in travel behaviour.
Likewise, making existing school environments more AST ‘friendly’ through the provision of supportive infrastructure and/or
reduction of motor vehicle dominance may also be effective. However, it is probable that a coordinated approach, involving
planners, policy makers, educators and parents, is likely to have the most significant impact on school travel
behaviour.