Assessing the effects of Children’s independent mobility range
and timeA B S T R A C T
Introduction: Previous studies provide evidence that associations between different factors and
children’s independent mobility (CIM). In these studies, no difference between CIM range and
time whereas have been difference between CIM range and time and attitudes of children and
parents. Roles of different factors, including gender haven’t been also proven with CIM time and
range. Therefore, sought to determine impact assessment of socio-demographic, built-environmental
and perceptual characteristics with CIM time and range varied by sex.
Methods: The present study measured the longest distance of each child from house as CIM range
(meter) and the CIM time was calculated based on the weekly activity programs of children
(minutes). Research were conduct in Ilam, Iran and 102 twelve-to-fourteen-year-old children andtheir parent were studied (N = 204).
Results: Results of multivariate regression indicated that the CIM time was affected by parents’
perception and equal between girls and boys (32 min) despite the fact that parents’ fear of crime
against girls was higher than boys’. The CIM range was highly dependent on built-environmental
characteristics and boys’ CIM range (216 m) was greater than girls’ (159 m).
Conclusions: Vertical development of housing, parents’ fear and sex differences were the most
important factors in reducing the CIM.
1. Introduction
    The children’s independent mobility (CIM) is an important issue associated with the children life. Children’s freedom to play in the
neighborhood has developmental, health and social benefits (Badland and Oliver, 2012). The CIM has psychological benefits and
allows children to communicate with friends and communities (Schoeppe et al., 2013). The interaction with the environment exposes
children to the real experience of life. A large number of studies have also investigated the effect of CIM on increasing the children’s
physical activity (Page et al., 2010). In recent years, the reduction of CIM has been demonstrated by studies in different countries
(Fyhri et al., 2011; McMillan, 2007). In the 20 years past, CIM have dropped from 130 to 72 min per week in New Zealand, but it has
increased from 31 percent to 58 percent in those traveling to schools by car (Witten et al., 2013). The limitation of CIM has not only
reduced the children’s physical activity (Wen et al., 2009), but also adversely affected mental abilities, educational ability,
personal-social skills, and children’s friendliness (Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002).
    In a study by Loebach and Gilliland (2014) although traveling far from home on occasion, 94.5% of children’s time on average was
spent within a short distance of home. Participants spent little of their free time in broader neighborhood settings. In research of Carver
et al. (2014) CIM was restricted and only a third of children were allowed to roam more than 15 min from home alone. The number of
accessible destination types in the neighborhood was positively associated with CIM range. The purpose of Schoeppe et al. (2016)
study was to investigate adult attitudes on distances children should be allowed to travel to places and play in outdoor areas without
adult supervision. 62% of 1293 adults would restrict children’s independent travel to places <500 m from home, and 74% would
restrict independent outdoor play <500 m from home. Also these models found the longest child distance of 250–1600 m from home
(Harten and Olds, 2004). The most important message of previous studies was that 1) CIM takes place in an activity space around
residential area, and 2) CIM time and CIM range have been reducing.
    The residential area results from housing development policies that affect CIM (Moore, 1986; Leventhal and Newman, 2010).
Furthermore, it is evident that there were relationships between CIM and build environment (Lin et al., 2017), disturbance in
neighborhoods (Molnar et al., 2004), outdoor playing space, height residential buildings (Evans, 2003), number of housing floors and
residential neighborhood density. Findings suggest that built environment policy that is focused on building footprint density could
have a positive effect on CIM (Islam et al., 2014), whereas building density, measured as floor area ratio, had a negative association
with CIM (Broberg et al., 2013a). Hayley et al. (2015) found the higher impact of social-demographic factors compared with housing
characteristics of residential places.
    Roles of social-demographic factors, including gender have been also proven (Carver et al., 2013; Alparone and Pacili 2012), but
Broberg et al. (2013b) found no significant difference between genders. Children in Finland have one of the highest level of CIM, and
therefore, research findings from this country may not be generalized to the other countries particularly which have lower level of CIM.
The researchers have emphasized the impact of gender differences on CIM (Brown et al., 2008), but the impact of gender inequalities
affecting the CIM should be further considered an important social factor (Islam et al., 2014). The male children have greater physical
activity than girls (Johansson, 2006; Page et al., 2009). Studies have mentioned a positive relationship between boys with basic motor
skills (Shams and Vameghi, 2018), physical activity (Martin et al., 2009), and independent mobility (O’Brien et al., 2000), compared to
girls. Furthermore, Soleimani et al. (2018) studied a positive relationship between male and evolutionary delays in children. An
important part of girls’ limitations is not gender-based, but it is owing to the social and political contexts. Previous researches provides
a valuable insight into the lack of attention to children in political geography (Skelton, 2010). The social contexts of modern cities do
not have the same capabilities for male and female needs, and they have more male characteristics (Siadati and Majedi, 2015). This
gender inequality has been more problematic on the CIM. Part of the gender inequality affecting children comes from parent attitudes.
    Perceptive factors in children are associated with parent, such that parents’ fear of CIM could be the most important factor limiting
CIM. The road injury is the most important cause of child death in developed countries (UNICEF, 2001). Children’s fear of cars, and
children’s and parents’ sense of safety are among other perceptual factors considered in previous studies (Rudner, 2012; Giles-Corti
et al., 2011). Also CIM is about characteristics such as peer support, parents’ attitude to independent mobility, parents’ and children’s
attitudes towards traffic, crimes against children and fear of strangers (Foster et al., 2014). Many results suggest a significant decline in
parents’ allowance for children’s free games and independent travel to school (McDonald et al., 2011; Schoeppe et al., 2016; Shaw
et al., 2013). Parents’ attitudes affect the CIM time and range but there is no coherent research into the relationship between parent
perception and CIM range/time.
    Previous studies provide evidence that associations between environmental variables and CIM vary between boys and girls (Yan
et al., 2010). Understanding whether built environmental, social and perceptual determinants influence CIM differently among boys
and girls can be used to guide decisions related to programming options and the design and retrofitting of neighborhood. Results show
that girls’ physical activity was more strongly affected by social effects (eg, presence of other active children) whereas boys’ physical
activity was more strongly influenced by the availability of park facilities (Bocarro et al., 2015).
    The previous studies have investigated roles of Sex differences and parent perceptions (Soleimani et al., 2018; Mackett et al., 2007;
Kullman 2010), but there is no study into effects of Sex differences and parent/child perceptions on CIM. Like other cities of Iran, Ilam
has a nine-year condition for girls in the field of citizens’ religious beliefs affecting parent perceptions on presence of their children
outdoors. Sex differences will be exacerbated when combined with parent perceptions on their children’s activity. Therefore, there is a
need for studies into relationships between Sex differences and parent perceptions of the significant reduction of girls’ independent
mobility compared to boys. There is no research on CIM not only in Ilam, but also in Iran. This research explored build environment
and perceptual characteristics related to promote CIM varied by sex in Iran, Ilam. Bhosale et al. (2017) suggest the perceived degree of
CIM is heavily dependent on mixed method. So in this research have been used two indicators 1) CIM time and 2) CIM range to
evaluated CIM. Therefore, this study sought to determine impact assessment of social, environmental and perceptual characteristics
with CIM time and range varied by sex.
2. Method
2.1. Data collection, survey process
    A cross-sectional study was carried out to measure the relationships between independent variables and CIM range/time. The
research was conducted in Ilam during the fall and winter of 2018. In this research targeted the age range of 12–14 years (first period
high schools’ children). Out of the 37 first period high school, 12 public schools, including 6 female and 6 male schools have been
selected. With the help of the principals of these 12 schools, letters of request for consent were sent to students’ parent. The consent
form was signed by both child and parent. Finally, a total of 57 boys (55.9%), 45 girls (44.1%), and their parent cooperated in the study
with a participation rate of 63% of all parent (N = 204). Surveys of each class lasted for 60–90 min, including a questionnaire for
children and behavioral maps drawn for each subject by the help of a researcher (Table 1). The parent questionnaires with a letter of
cooperation have been sent individually to the parent through schools.
    The internal consistency of Cronbach’s alpha was used in this questionnaire. In the present study, eliminating some of the questions
in order to integrate the questionnaire was inevitable. Questions 12, 18, 25, 29 and 35 were omitted. As a result, Cronbach’s alpha
coefficient was calculated for a total of 43 questions with software and the value was 0.834. Therefore, the questionnaire of this
research has acceptable reliability.
2.2. Study context
    The city of Ilam is one of the Micro cities of Iran located in the west of this country. With a population of 220,000 and area of 22,000
square kilometers in 2016. More specifically, 46,200 middle childhood children reside in this city (21%). This census shows that of
each five persons one is in his or her middle childhood (Center of Statistics, 2016). The people of Ilam City are Kurd and they have the
same sex geography for girls. Girls after puberty are less allowed by parent to play freely outside the home. Although, development in
Ilam like macro cities in Iran is proceeding at a quick pace, as a result of fast population growth but social situation such as parent
perceptions about CIM were haven’t investigated in Iran and Ilam.
    Ilam is undergoing transition from houses with yards to apartment buildings, similar to all provinces of Iran. This is more prob­
lematic in terms of the facilities for children. The children’s use of the outdoor environment has reduced since such cities are being
designed and planned for adults and children’s play and recreational activities are restricted to indoor environment of their homes.
Ilam is divided into two districts and there is no significant difference between the two regions in the child population and in building
density. Houses within Ilam are a mix of two- and three-floor single-family houses and up to six-floor apartments. Different places are
accessible to children in this city. The development of play areas, green spaces, utilities and access has not changed much since ten
years ago but apartment building is developing quickly. Therefore, Ilam is a good case to examine the relation between changing
environmental condition and CIM.
2.3. Measures
2.3.1. Places
    As potentially meaningful places for children, functional, social, and emotional affordances were studied (Broberg et al., 2013a). So
behavioral and perceptual places were studied based on previous studies. Behavioral places including friends’ and relatives’ houses,
shops, bakeries, cafes, parks, educational institutions, libraries, sports clubs, gaming centers, and playgrounds. Perceptual places
including allowed, forbidden, noisy, quiet, safe, dangerous, clean, dirty, libraries, beautiful and exciting. In this research behavioral
and perceptual places were marked by child in map. The blue circle indicates behavioral places and the purple circle represents
perceptual places (Fig. 1).
2.3.2. CIM range
    Longest distance of each child from house was measured as CIM range (meter). The red square represents home and the yellow
pentagon is a school (Fig. 1). On this basis, first, each child found the location of home and school on the map of Ilam by the help of a
researcher. Second, behavioral and perceptual places for each child were marked on maps. With each behavioral and perceptual places
marked on the map, the respondents were asked how they reached the place. Only places that have gone without parent are calculated.
The longest distance traveled from home was selected as CIM range (Fig. 1). A longest path distance was created for each child by
converting all behavior places then applying Cost Distance tool within ArcGIS v10.0 to calculate the longest distance traveled from the
child’s home along school and all behavior or perceptual places. This information was transmitted to the map of detailed plan
approved by Ilam city.
2.3.3. CIM time
    In the present study, the CIM time as a dependent variable was measured as the average CIM during a week (minute). Despite the
fact that the mean CIM time is not objectively measured on a weekly basis, the use of simple reports by children over a short period oftime is reliable (Brodersen et al., 2005). 
Table 1 The three sections of the questionnaire.
  section    variables     content             Number of     Type of answer     responder         Place          Results
                                               question
  1          independent   Closed              43            Four Likert        Children/parents  Child in       Children/parents’ attitudes toward
                           Questionnaire -                                                        school         the relationship of independent
                           Answer                                                                 Parents in     variables with CIM range/time
                                                                                                  home
  2          Dependent     Cognitive-          20            Location on        Children with the school         longest distance from home without
                           behavioral map                    ArcGIS map         help of                          parents (CIM range)
                                                                                researcher
  3                        Weekly activity     1             Record departure/  Children with the home           average weekly child activity
                           table                             arrival time at    help of parents                  outside the home without parents
                                                             home                                                (CIM time)
In the present research, a CIM time report was considered for a week. The children were not
asked about the CIM time, but the report included a weekly activity table that could record the time of exiting and entering house, as it
was easier for children. The CIM time was calculated in minutes for all days of the week except for holidays. The total number of
activities was considered for 5 days per week, and it was divided by the number of days of the week, and then the mean daily CIM time
was calculated for each child.
2.4. Independent variables
2.4.1. Social-demographic characteristics
    The impact of variables such as age, gender, parent education level, family income, school round-trip method, and the children
mobility rate on children’s activities and games outside the house was also demonstrated (Kerr et al., 2006; Larsen et al., 2009;
Villanueva et al., 2012b). The present study examined sex differences between children, roles of children’s and parents’ age, number of
siblings, length of residence in the neighborhood and how round-trips home and school (walking = 1 and by car = 2).
2.4.2. Perceptive characteristics
     Perceptive factors in children are related to parent, so that parents’ fear of their children’s playing outside can be the most
important factor in limiting the CIM range in the surroundings. The fear of cars’ speed and the children and parents’ sense of security
are other perceptive factors considered in studies (Foster et al., 2014; Villanueva et al., 2014; Giles-Corti et al., 2011; Zwetrs et al.,
2010). The present research questioned the parent and children’s attitudes toward questions such as the safety in the neighborhood
and local parks, mobile game duration, play at home, nature, local parks, dead end alleys, game centers, unused land, sandy lands,
semi-finished buildings and their children’s activities during the night. To answer each of the questions related to perceptual variables,
four levels of agreement were defined in terms of the Likert scale (1 = very low, 2 = low, 3 = high and 4 = very high).
2.4.3. Build- environmental characteristics
     In the present research, type of housing, house price, net residential density, house area, house with courtyard/no courtyard, yard/
terrace area, number of floors, residence floor, and ease of access to local services were investigated as independent build environmental
variables. There were three types of housing in Ilam, including one floor with courtyard, apartments, and residential complexes.
Housing types were obtained through children questionnaires and confirmation by parent questionnaires. They were then
verified by the researcher’s field review. In the research, 62.7% of houses were single-floor with courtyard, and 37.3% were apartments
without any courtyard. The house price per square meter was determined by asking at least three real estate consultants in that
region after house locating by each child and confirming in the parent questionnaire. The net residential density was the result of
division of population by residential space with unit of person per hectare. To this end, the factor was calculated in the CIM range by
obtaining detailed plans from Ilam municipality, but due to violation of some employers of net residential density according to field
surveys, 13 (12%) out of 102 cases were contrary to parent statements and municipality reports. The areas of house and yard or terrace
(if they were) were measured in square meters by parents’ questionnaires. The number of house floors, the residential floor of each
child (Kim, 1997), and the house ease of access to service places of neighborhood (Koohsari et al., 2017; Villanueva et al., 2012a), were
also asked in the children and parents’ questionnaires.
2.5. Statistical analysis
     CIM range and CIM time was considered as the input data of SPSS software in order to measure the relationship between independent
variables and CIM range/time. IBM SPSS Statistic version 24 was used to analyze. Multivariate regression models were
employed to examine the associations between CIM range/time and housing, perceptive and socio-demographic characteristics. Results
were deemed significant at the <0.05 level.
3. Results
     The present research provided information on the respondents’ social-demographic variables according to the participation of 102
children and their parent (N = 204). Among parent, the participation percentage of mothers was higher than fathers. More than 90% of
respondents had at least one brother or sister. Most children often travel to/from school by cars (Table 2).
     The present research tries to find perceptive and build-environmental characteristics affecting the CIM range/time. Accordingly,
relationships between independent variables and the CIM range/time were separately investigated for boys and girls using the
bivariate analysis (Table 3).
     Among boys, in addition to a variable related to perceptual variables, there were significant relationships between four build-
environment variables and the CIM range. Three build-environment variables, type of housing (apartment) (P < .001), number of
floors and residential floor have been inverse relation with boys CIM range. Also a perceptual variable, play in home were inversely
associated with the boys CIM range. The accessibility to services had a direct relationship with the boys CIM range (P < .05).
Table 2 Characteristics of participants.
  Variable                                                                                Description
  Dependent             Children’s independent mobility range longest distance from home  81% children 250 m longest distance from their home
       variables        (CIM range)                           (meter)
                        Children’s independent mobility time  Average time outdoors on    23.5% children spent 0 min outdoors on weekdays
                        (CIM time)                            weekdays (minute)
  independent           social-demographic characteristics    Gender child                55.9 boys and 44.1 girls
       variable                                               Age child                   21.5%, 12 years’ old, 60%, 13 years’ old, 18.5%, 14 years’
                                                                                          old
                                                              Gender parents              67.7% male and 32.3% female
                                                              Age parents                 6.9%, 18–30 years’ old, 40.2%, 30–40 years’ old, 59.2%,
                                                                                          40–55 years’ old
                                                              Sibling                     9.8% was alone in home, 49% had a sister/brother, 41.2%
                                                                                          more of one
                                                              Residency                   18.6 was 1–2 years, 23.5% 2–5 years, 12.7% 5–8 years and
                                                                                          45.1% out of 8 years
                                                              Travel to school            75.5% by bus/car, 24.5% walk
In the case of girls, a build-environment variable and a perceptual variable was significantly related to the CIM range. Like boys, there was a
reverse effect of residential floor in apartments on the girls CIM range (P < .05). The girls’ tendency to play in green and natural spaces
was significantly related to the CIM range (P < .001).
    There were stronger relationships between the research independent variables and boys CIM time (Table 4). Four out of five
variables associated with the boys CIM time were perceptual characteristics. There was a significant direct relationship between
parents’ views on the safety of parks and play in nature with boys CIM time (P < .001). Also direct relation of playing in dirty ground
and the safety of dead end street have been with boys CIM time (P < .05). The house area was directly related to the boys CIM time. Like
boys, there were significant relationships between the research independent variables and the girls CIM. Each of five variables were
perceptual characteristics and related to parent perception. Respectively playing in game net, nightlife activity, playing in home, play
in dead end street and play with mobile had the highest levels of significant relationship to the girls CIM time (P < .001).
    Bivariate analysis indicates significant relationships between the research variables and CIM range and time. However, the
investigation of the research by a multivariate model can indicate the simultaneous effect of variables on 1) CIM range and (2) CIM
time. According to the multivariate analysis, among 29 studied variables, 5 variables were significantly related to the CIM range and 5
variables were associated with the CIM time (Table 5).
    Results of multivariate model indicated a role of build environment factor in the CIM range, especially boys. Living in apartments
has been negative impact on the boys CIM range (- 144 m). For each higher floor, CIM range decreased 34 m for boys and 36 m for
girls. Meanwhile, the proximity of green and natural spaces up to 48 m affected the increased girls CIM range. The research results
indicated that the CIM time was influenced by perceptual factors. Parent perceptions of parks safety and house area affected the boys
CIM time until 16 min. Furthermore, the parent’s license for children playing in nature had a positive 21 min’ effect on the boys CIM
time. Parent’s license for children’s nightly activities increased girls CIM time up to 25 min. In terms of 97.8% of parent and 86.7% of
girls, game nets were unsafe places for activity and had a reversed effect on the girls CIM time (98 min).
4. Discussion
4.1. Vertical development of housing and reduction of the CIM range
    The results indicated that the CIM range was more dependent build-environment variables, and the CIM time mostly depended on
perceptual variables. In the field of CIM range, 5 variables were significant, including four build-environment variables and a
perceptual factor. Among build-environment variables affecting the CIM range, level of residence floor has negatively affected both
genders. On average, boys and girls CIM range decreased by 35 m for every upper floor. Furthermore, two variables housing type
(apartment), and building height inversely affected the boys CIM. Broberg et al. (2013a) found a positive effect of residential density
on the CIM range. In another study, the independent mobility of children living in single-household houses was higher than that in
apartments and villas (Broberg et al., 2013b). In this research, the independent mobility of children living in apartments was lower
than that in single-floor houses. Also, the independent mobility of children living in lower-floor of apartments was higher than that in
upper-floor houses. The negative effect of housing vertical development on CIM range was the most important result among
build-environment characteristics.
    The housing development policy in Iran is through increase height of apartments based on the detailed plan of each city. The
housing pattern of Ilam was a single-floor house with the courtyard like most of Iran’s cities but owing to implementation of housing
development policies, single-floor houses have become apartments. Ilam municipality statistics show that in the past two decades at
least 100,000 single-floor houses became four-floor houses. According to the research results, the CIM range have been reduced 35 m
by increase one-floor to houses. Because of increasing the height of buildings and reducing the CIM range that have been proven in this
study, is not unexpected reducing the CIM range in Ilam.
Table 5
Results of Multivariate Model for CIM range and CIM time.
  variable                                                     Coefficient (B)      Standardized coefficient (ß)           boys             girls
  CIM range            Housing type; apartment                 - 144.280            -.428                                  .001**           –
                       Number of stories                       - 52.650             -.334                                  .011*            –
                       level of residence floor                - 34.715             -.311                                  .010*            –
                       Play in nature                          48.327               .332                                   –                .019*
                       level of residence floor                - 36.460             -.328                                  –                .020*
  CIM time             Parent perceptions of park safety       16.669               .325                                   .006**           –
                       House area                              16.405               .392                                   .001**           –
                       parent’s fear of play in nature         21.776               .329                                   .006**           –
                       Parent perceptions of game net safety   - 98.750             .724                                   –                .000***
                       parent’s fear of night activity         25.911               .303                                   –                .000***
4.2. Effects of sex differences on the CIM range and time    Like previous studies, the present research investigated the impact of housing on the definition of the CIM range, but on the
contrary, it emphasized roles of gender differences in increasing CIM. The CIM range was less than 216 m for boys and less than 159 m
for girls. The boys CIM was greater than the girls CIM. This result has been proved in many studies (Carver et al., 2012; Page et al.,
2009; Prezza et al., 2010). Some studies have also failed to find any significant gender differences affecting the CIM (Johansson, 2003;
Joshi et al., 1999), or found a little impact (Shaw et al., 2013). However, the CIM range was affected by sex differences in the present
research, and it was more accurate than CIM. In other words, independent mobility of the present research included the CIM range and
time. Therefore, it also studied the roles of gender differences affecting the CIM time. The average CIM time was 32.5 min for boys and
32.1 min for girls, but the difference was not significant. In other words, the CIM time was almost equal in different genders, but the
boys CIM was more than the girls. In general, the boys CIM was higher than the girls CIM. Therefore, it should be noted that parents’
fear affected the CIM time to be equal for girls and boys.
4.3. Parent fear and reduced CIM time
    Four out of five variables affected the CIM time were related to parent perceptions. Children spend most of their time at home as
long as they are at home under the influence of parent permission for CIM. The average daily activity time outside the home was 32
min, which was a half of standard daily activity for children aged 5–17 years (WHO, 2010). So like research by Hayley et al. (2015), the
parental perception of the environment security affected the CIM. The boys and girls CIM time decreased and were equal under the
influence of parent perception. However, the higher range of the boys CIM than the girls CIM was affected by build environment
conditions. Two components of parent perceptions, namely game centers conditions and nightlife activities, were the results of fear of
insecurity for girls and were significantly proven (P < .001). Meanwhile, two variables parent perceptions of park safety and parent’s
fear of play in nature affected the boys CIM time had lower significant levels (P < .01). The result was consistent with some previous
studies into parents’ major concern about daughters than sons (Foster et al., 2014). Among variables related to the percept in the
present research, the parents’ fear had the greatest impact on the CIM time. House area, which was associated with build environmental
variables, affected the boys’ CIM time. It hasn’t studied in previous research but experience of living in larger houses made it
possible for children to use capabilities of surroundings.
    In the field of the CIM range, boys CIM had more than girls. The CIM range was affected by build environmental variables and
housing characteristics. It can be argued that the independent mobility range for boys living in single-floor houses with courtyards was
significantly higher than that for girls living in residential complexes. Apart from gender inequalities in the present research, the effect
of living in upper floors has been proven to reduce the CIM range. There was no gender difference in the field of the CIM time, but
parents’ fear of having girl’s outdoors was higher than their fear of having boys. The CIM time was influenced by parent perceptions of
safety conditions. The CIM time decreased regardless of genders, and it was proven by parents’ concerns for the presence of their
children outside the home. So like a research by Love et al. (2019), among three factors, namely personal, social and environmental
factors, social communication played a crucial role in reducing CIM. Also Nansen et al. (2015) considered parent, friends and environment
as three factors for the reduction of CIM. In this research proven parents (parents’ fear), environment (housing) and gender
differences as three factors for the reducing of CIM.
5. Conclusion
    The present research evaluated the CIM through two variables CIM range and time. The CIM range was significantly related to build
environment variables; and the CIM time significantly depended on perceptual variables. Housing characteristics in the field of build
environment variables, and parents’ fear in the field of perceptual variables have the greatest relation with CIM. Among the housing
characteristics, the most important factor was the negative effect of housing on upper floors of apartments for girls’ and boys’ CIM. Like
previous studies, CIM range and time decreased in the present study. As long as children were at home, the CIM decreased under the
influence of parents’ fear; and the parents’ concerns was higher for girls than boys. As children left the houses, the CIM range was
affected by characteristics of residential place; and the boys CIM range was greater than the girls’ CIM. Girls compared to boys have
undesirable conditions for physical activity and CIM in Ilam. Gender differences have an important impact on CIM.
    It is suggested that housing development policies be revised with a focus on reducing the development of high-rise apartments
without yards to enhance the CIM range. The roles of sex differences in designing neighborhoods should be considered owing to the
girls’ lower CIM than boys’. Efforts should be made to promote environmental features of residential neighborhoods to reduce parents’
fear of children’s presence out of house through various physical, psychological, social, cultural, economic and religious fields.
    The present research investigated relationships between CIM and sex differences, housing characteristics, and children/parent
perceptions conditions. Although the present research was a progressive study into the conceptualization and measurement of the CIM
range and time, and examined roles of housing and parent perceptions of children’s activity in local places, the small sample size made
it difficult to perform the multivariate analysis and regression, and limited us to discover initial individual differences in the field of
local environments. However, the present study investigated the roles of gender differences. This research can be deepened with a
larger sample size and attention to diverse cultural, social and build environment backgrounds, such as traditional contexts of urban,
suburban and villages. The strengths of the obtained results of the research included the focus on multivariate relationships of housing
characteristics and parent perceptions of the CIM range and time for girls and boys. Paying attention to build environment characteristics
of CIM in neighborhoods by field studies can deepen and develop statistical studies to understand the relationship between the
residential area and children.

