CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES
2020, VOL. 18, NO. 6, 667–683
https://doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2019.1685074
Social relationships, nature, and tra<U+FB03>c: <U+FB01>ndings from a child-
centred approach to measuring active school travel route
perceptions
              a                      b                       b             b
V. Egli         , L. Mackay            , C. Jelleyman         , E. Ikeda    , S. Hopkinsc and M. Smith                  a
a
  The School of Nursing, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand;
b
  The School of Sport and Recreation, Faculty of Health and Environmental Sciences, AUT, Auckland, New Zealand;
c
 The School of Physiotherapy, Central Michigan University College of Science and Technology, Mount Pleasant, USA
    ABSTRACT                                                                                   ARTICLE HISTORY
    Globally rates of active school travel (AST) are in decline. New Zealand has               Received 6 September 2018
    one of the lowest rates of AST compared to other countries. To date much                   Accepted 8 October 2019
    research investigating reasons for this decline and evaluations of
                                                                                               KEYWORDS
    interventions to increase the uptake of AST have occurred from an                          Active travel; active transport;
    adult-centric perspective. This study takes a child-centred approach to                    passive travel; child voice;
    elicit children’s voice in understanding school travel perceptions and                     built environment
    preferences. In total 1102 children aged 8–13 years from 19 schools
    across Auckland, New Zealand took part in a public participation GIS
    survey utilising both closed- and open-ended questions. The results
    indicate that regardless of active or passive travel mode, children are
    aware of the distance/time to school and enjoy the opportunity for
    social interactions. An evidence-based framework for understanding and
    measuring children’s likes, dislikes, and key activities for their route to
    school is presented.
Background
Physical activity plays a vital role in children’s current and future health, development and wellbeing
(World Health Organization 2011). Conversely, time spent sedentary (e.g. sitting, lying) has been
shown to have detrimental e<U+FB00>ects on health independent of physical activity (Hamilton et al.
2008). In line with most industrialised countries, New Zealand children’s physical activity levels
are decreasing and sedentary time is increasing (Smith et al. 2018). Active school travel (AST, e.g.
walking or cycling to school) is a convenient opportunity for many children to accumulate physical
activity (Schoeppe et al. 2015; Oliver, Parker, et al. 2016) and can disproportionately but positively
displace time spent sedentary in vehicles. For instance, a 10 min car journey may take up to an hour
on foot (Chillón et al. 2011; Larouche et al. 2018). There is a noticeable di<U+FB00>erence between the time it
takes to get to school on foot compared to in a vehicle. However, the long-term e<U+FB00>ects of routinely
walking to school demonstrate positive health bene<U+FB01>ts compared to transportation by vehicle rou-
tinely. Improving levels of AST can yield numerous co-bene<U+FB01>ts, including reduced tra<U+FB03>c congestion
and associated carbon emissions (Delbosc and Currie 2013; Korkala, Hugg, and Jaakkola 2014).
Despite such signi<U+FB01>cant bene<U+FB01>ts, AST in New Zealand children is low following a substantial decline
over recent decades (Ministry of Transport 2015; Smith et al. 2018).
    This study draws from the socio-ecological model of health behaviour, a framework that encom-
passes the multiple layers of possible in<U+FB02>uences on AST (Sallis, Owen, and Fisher 2015). Aligning
CONTACT V. Egli         v.egli@auckland.ac.nz
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

668        V. EGLI ET AL.
with this model, the built environment, the natural environment, the social environment and safety
are pertinent to understanding AST.
    Distance to school is the most consistent associate of AST across country, age and socio-economic
status (Schreiber et al. 2006; Rothman et al. 2018; Ikeda et al. 2018). Tra<U+FB03>c exposure, street and path
connectivity and presence of walking or cycling facilities are important factors associated with school
travel mode (Pont et al. 2009; Chillón et al. 2011; Rothman et al. 2018). However, estimated variables
from an adult-centric perspective on AST route may not be transferable (Ikeda, Mavoa, et al. 2018).
Calls for increased sensitivity and speci<U+FB01>city in understanding the environment-behaviour relation-
ship have been made (Giles-Corti et al. 2005). Few studies have examined built environment features
for the school route (Ikeda, Mavoa, et al. 2018), with most estimating values for an arbitrarily de<U+FB01>ned
neighbourhood and linking these with AST. Estimated routes (e.g. using geographic information sys-
tems (GIS)) can di<U+FB00>er signi<U+FB01>cantly in terms of spatial overlap and environmental characteristics
from actual routes travelled (Ikeda, Mavoa, et al. 2018).
    The natural environment (e.g. topography, weather and <U+FB02>ora and fauna) has also been associated
with children’s activity and may be linked with AST. Children who live in rural, suburban and inner
cities have been shown to engage meaningfully with nature in their surroundings (Freeman et al.
2016). Indeed ‘special trees’ have been noted as neighbourhood places of importance in previous
research with children in New Zealand (Freeman et al. 2016). Weather, particularly extremes in
weather (i.e. rain, heat and snow), is a prominent theme to emerge from qualitative research with
children on their interaction and engagement with their everyday environments (Ross 2007;
Chaudhury et al. 2019). Likewise, geographic features such as hilly and undulating terrain can in<U+FB02>u-
ence walking and cycling levels (Baslington 2008). Natural environments like beaches and parks are
commonly reported by children across the Paci<U+FB01>c region as places of importance within their neigh-
bourhoods (Freeman, Lingam, and Burnett 2015). Natural environments are often places of restor-
ation for children (Korpela, Kyttä, and Hartig 2002; Wells and Evans 2003), and provide
opportunities for physical activity, play, and social interaction (Carr and Luken 2014).
    The social environment is also important for understanding school travel mode. AST has consist-
ently been shown to be associated with neighbourhood social interaction. Greater and more frequent
community connections avail more ‘eyes’ to provide social surveillance for children who are enga-
ging in AST (Egli et al. 2018). A consistent inverse relationship between household income, car own-
ership and AST has been reported (Pont et al. 2009; Chaufan et al. 2019; Rothman et al. 2018). The
most likely reasons for this include ‘trip chaining’ and increased distance from school in higher
socio-economic groups who may select schools based on reputation rather than locality (Fyhri
et al. 2011; Mandic et al. 2017), and to ease drop o<U+FB00> and pick up for working parents (Witten
et al. 2013; Black, Kolesnikova, and Taylor 2014). It is also important to note that there are many
cultural di<U+FB00>erences and social norms relating to AST and indeed this is re<U+FB02>ected in vastly di<U+FB00>erent
rates of AST across countries, for example Switzerland and Columbia have AST rates around 70%
(Fyhri et al. 2011), whereas New Zealand has one of the lowest rates of ATS internationally, with
29% of children aged 5–17 years walking and 2–3% cycling to school (Ministry of Transport 2015).
    Parents act as gatekeepers to children’s AST and parents perceived neighbourhood safety includ-
ing tra<U+FB03>c safety and social-surveillance are major in<U+FB02>uences on parental licence for AST (Oliver et al.
2014; Mah et al. 2017; Egli et al. 2018). Concern about tra<U+FB03>c safety is the most commonly reported
perceived barrier to AST by parents (Lu et al. 2014). Parents appear to be acutely aware of the
increase in the number of cars on the road compared to when they were children (Witten et al.
2013). Less cited and not strongly associated with rates of AST, but an underlying consideration,
is that of ‘stranger danger’ and lack of community surveillance (D’Haese et al. 2011). Some research
shows that parents report that their children prefer to be driven to school and this in<U+FB02>uences travel
mode decisions (Lu et al. 2014). However, these studies were conducted via in-depth interviews and
surveys with parents. While the opinions, concerns and fears held by parents are well known, much
less is known about children’s perceptions as reported by children.

                                                                      CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES       669
   Altogether, this body of evidence demonstrates the complexity of understanding factors that may
in<U+FB02>uence children’s AST from a researcher and parent perspective. Yet, little is known from the
child’s perspective. Individual factors are also important components of school travel mode. Increas-
ing age, male sex and non-Caucasian ethnicity are also associated with higher levels of AST, although
the relationship with ethnicity is attenuated when controlling for socio-economic status (Lu et al.
2014; Rothman et al. 2018). Evidence suggests that self-e<U+FB03>cacy for independent travel to school
may play a role. Importantly, when asked, children indicate a preference for AST and can act as
powerful advocates for their own health behaviours, playing a key role in decision-making around
AST (Hinckson 2016). However, evidence is lacking on factors that may encourage AST from a
child’s perspective.
   Understanding children’s viewpoints can add context and value when developing environments
conducive to their health and well-being which may not be captured by adult-centric methods.
Child-centred approaches such as photovoice (Fusco et al. 2012; Carroll et al. 2015), a<U+FB03>nity
group interviews and go-along interviews have successfully been employed to identify unique
insights into relationships between the built environment and children’s health behaviours (Oliver
et al. 2011). The main limitation of these methods is that they are resource-intensive, allowing cap-
ture of information from small sample sizes only. Qualitative GIS and participatory mapping are
methods that have a long history of being successfully used with children (Veale 2005; Brown
et al. 2017; Wilson et al. 2019).
   A recently developed tool, public participation GIS (PPGIS) (www.maptionnaire.com) can
address some of these limitations through internet-based surveys which allow for place-based studies
of human experiences and everyday behaviour, capturing both qualitative and quantitative data with
large sample sizes (Kahila and Kyttä 2009; Kyttä et al. 2013). The PPGIS methodology has been suc-
cessfully employed in a range of surveys with over 1800 children and young people internationally
(Kyttä, Broberg, and Kahila 2012). Recently, PPGIS was used to map the urban experiences of over
1300 children from Finland and Japan (Kyttä et al. 2018). The authors call for research that considers
the diverse environmental experiences and preferences of children. PPGIS is child-friendly, scalable,
and able to capture qualitative and quantitative experiential information from children’s
perspectives.
   This research takes a child-centred approach to undertaking research with children (Sta<U+FB00>ord
2017). It acknowledges that children and childhood are not homogenous (Beazley et al. 2009) and
that childhood is more than a physiological and psychological period of development (Prout and
James 2003). In this research, children are seen as active, social beings who shape the structures
and processes around them (Morrow 2008). Thus, it is important that in addition to the predomi-
nantly quantitative research on motivations for, barriers to and facilitators of AST that the child’s
voice is also heard. The aim of this research was to understand preferences and perceptions about
the route to school with a large group of children living in Auckland, New Zealand, from their
own perspective, using PPGIS.
Methods
Participants
This study reports results from 1102 children aged 8–13 years from eight intermediate schools
(middle/junior high, children from school years 7-8, hereafter ‘older children’) and nine primary
schools (elementary schools, children from school years 5-6, hereafter ‘younger children’) in Auck-
land, New Zealand, participating in the Neighbourhoods for Active Kids Study (NfAK). The aim of
NfAKwas to determine how neighbourhood built environments are associated with independent
mobility, AST, physical activity, body size, and neighbourhood experiences of children. Only
methods that pertain to this paper are presented; full details of the study design and methods are
described in detail elsewhere (Oliver, McPhee et al. 2016). Ethical approval to conduct the study

670         V. EGLI ET AL.
                                                Invited
                                               N = 2091
                                                                  Did not consent
                                                                      N = 964
                                              Consented
                                               N = 1127
                                                                      Absent
                                                                      N = 25
                                              Completed
                                            soGIS survey
                                               N = 1102
Figure 1. Flow of participants through the Neighbourhoods for Active Kids study.
was provided by the host institution ethics committees (AUTEC, 14/263, 3 September 2014;
MUHECN 3 September 2014; UAHPEC 9 September 2014).
    Children were recruited through intermediate (middle/junior high) schools (7–8 years, approxi-
mate ages 11–12 years) and a contributing primary school (including children from 5 to 6 years only,
ages 9–10 years) across eight neighbourhoods. Neighbourhoods were selected through the utilisation
of a matrix encompassing neighbourhood-level socioeconomic, walkability and destination accessi-
bility features to identify areas for recruitment. School decile was used as a proxy for area level socio-
economic status (Ministry of Education 2016). Parents provided informed consent prior to the data
collection session and before data collection commenced children provided verbal assent. Children
were taken through the PPGIS programme with one research assistant allocated per child. The time
taken to complete the PPGIS survey varied from approximately 15minutes to 35minutes. Flow of
participants through the NfAK study can be seen in Figure 1.
Study location
Auckland is the largest city in New Zealand with a population of approximately 1.5 million people;
approximately a third of all New Zealanders reside in Auckland (Statistics New Zealand 2013).
Auckland is a city with large numbers of immigrants from the Paci<U+FB01>c, Asia and Australia. It is a
city of contrasts, both in land use type and wealth. High density city living sits alongside sprawling
housing developments and traditional beachside settlements, fringed by harbours, subtropical rain-
forests and farm land. The results from the most recent census show that Auckland contains the rich-
est areas in New Zealand, and the poorest, often juxtaposed in close geographic proximity to each
other (Exeter et al. 2018).
Procedure
Data were collected from February 2015 to September 2016, in 19 schools across the Auckland region.
Trained researchers visited participating schools during school hours and, following standard operat-
ing procedures, provided child participants one-on-one assistance to complete an online interactive
mapping survey (PPGIS). Pilot testing of the survey was conducted prior to data collection, to ensure
acceptability and utility of the PPGIS method with young New Zealand children (Oliver, McPhee, et al.
2016). The data presented here were gathered from closed- and open-ended questions within the
PPGIS survey. The closed-ended questions were about their usual modes of travel to school (including

                                                                        CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES        671
single or multiple modes within the travel). Children were identi<U+FB01>ed as participating in active school
travel if any active mode(s) (e.g. walk, bike, scooter, skateboard) were involved within the travel. Pas-
sive travel was determined to be either car or public transport only reported within the travel. Children
were not given speci<U+FB01>c guidelines on what constituted each travel mode. In line with child-centred
research methods children were respected as being able to answer these questions and determine
their own ‘usual mode of travel’ themselves (Jones 2008). Three open-ended questions were asked:
(1) What do you like about your usual route to school? (2) What do you dislike about your usual
route to school? and (3) What do you like to do on your usual route to school? Children answered
these questions independently and were not probed for clari<U+FB01>cation or expansion of ideas (Noonan
et al. 2016; Kanagasabai et al. 2018), when children asked for assistance with entering open-ended
responses into the PPGIS programme, researchers typed exactly what was said by the child. Infor-
mation on participants’ school year, sex, and ethnicity was provided by the school.
Analysis
PPGIS survey responses were downloaded from www.maptionnaire.com and combined with demo-
graphic datasets in Microsoft Excel. These datasets were then uploaded into SPSS version 25 for
analysis. Information on the mapping component of the PPGIS survey from Neighbourhoods for
Active Kids is described elsewhere (Ikeda, Mavoa et al. 2018; Egli et al. 2018 and presented here
are the responses to the three open-ended questions.
    Descriptive information for demographic characteristics, usual travel mode, and count of com-
ments made was calculated in SPSS. Responses to the three open-ended questions were imported
into NVivo 11 Pro (QSR International Pty Ltd. Version 11) for analysis. The responses were concise,
list-type text, which typically ranged from single words to short phrases that contained single or mul-
tiple themes. These data represent child ‘top of mind’ perspectives of their route to school, in terms of
what they like, dislike and what they like to do while travelling to school. The nature of short open-
ended responses allows broad insights from a large sample of children not captured in closed-ended
questions (Roberts et al. 2014).
    Content analysis focussed on the content and contextual meaning of each response statement,
either explicit or inferred. Content analysis included deductive (i.e. pre-determined themes based
on the previous literature) and inductive (i.e. data-driven) methods to identify themes within the
data. Broad pre-determined top-level themes were developed based on features of neighbourhoods
previously reported to be associated with children’s AST (‘Built Environment’, ‘Natural Environ-
ment’, ‘Social Environment’, and ‘Safety’). Sub-themes were added based on concepts emerging
from the text. Where more than one concept was expressed in a single response, each concept
was coded separately. For example, one response to the question ‘What do you like about your
route to school?’ was, ‘It’s easy to remember, and I can meet friends on the way to school’. This
response was broken down into two separate statements: (a) ‘It’s easy to remember’, and (b) ‘I
can meet friends on the way to school’. The authors independently and collaboratively conducted
the process of examination, articulation, re-interpretation, omission, and addition or reformulation
of the themes and subthemes. Once coding was complete, a printout of all statements within each
sub-theme was reviewed to con<U+FB01>rm their correct categorisation. Interpretation of coded themes
was conducted separately for each question. Overall counts of statements were used only to identify
the most popular themes for the sample, and for each age, sex and travel mode group.
Results
Participants
Participant <U+FB02>ow through the study is shown in Figure 1. Demographic and usual travel mode infor-
mation is presented in Table 1. The <U+FB01>nal sample was ethnically representative of the New Zealand

                                                                                             CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES                673
population (13% Maori, 15% Paci<U+FB01>c, 13% Asian) and 49% were male (Auckland Council 2014).
Approximately half of the participants were from a primary school (51.4%), with the remainder
attending intermediate school. Overall, 852 (77.3%) reported what they like about their route to
school, 851 (77.2%) reported what they like to do on their route to school, and 749 (68.0%) reported
their dislikes.
Coding Structure
Four top-level themes were developed based on literature: ‘Built Environment’, ‘Natural Environ-
ment’, ‘Social Environment’ and ‘Safety’. Two additional top-level themes, ‘Activities’ and ‘Travel
to School’, arose through the data. Sub-themes were added to describe the meaning of responses.
De<U+FB01>nitions of these themes can be seen in Table 2. A framework of the themes developed through
deductive and inductive methods is presented in Figure 2.
    Altogether, 3492 items emerged from the three short-answer questions. Of these, 1174 (34%)
items were coded as features children liked about their route to school, 821 (24%) items were
coded about what children dislike, and 1497 (43%) items were coded as things children like to do
on their route to school.
Built environment
The most mentioned feature of the children’s route to school was the time/distance travelled. Most
children liked the time/distance to school with 314 (76%) positive compared with 97 (24%) negative
related sentiments. Boys and girls, and younger and older school children used similar language to
express concurrent views. The quotes given below display this information as: sex (male (m) or
female (f)), travel mode (bike, scooter, skate, walk, car, public) and age (older or younger) e.g. a
younger girl who walks to school is reported as f_walk_younger. Whether the children in this
study reported liking short or long journeys depended on the mode of transport, with those using
AST expressing that they like that their journey is short and quick. AST was often recognised as
being the fastest way to get to school. To some extent this was facilitated by being able to use routes
other than the street network:
    “its fast and it’s the closest way to get to school” m_walk_older
    “it’s faster than taking the way through my street” m_bike_younger
Most children also liked that driving made their journey fast:
    “I like that it is quick in a car” f_car_younger
Others liked that it took a longer time because it gives them time to play or talk with friends:
Table 2. Top level themes and their descriptions.
Top Level Theme:                                                          Description
Built Environment      Built environments are the living spaces created and modi<U+FB01>ed by people, for example homes, workplaces,
                         services and roads
Natural                Natural environments are any public space that contains <U+FB02>ora and fauna, for example parks, recreation areas,
  Environment            forests and blue space
Social Environment     Social environments are places that facilitate or allow for social interactions to occur, common social
                         environments for children include playgrounds
Safety                 Safety includes all real and/or perceived threat to the physical, emotional or mental wellbeing of children
                         and those in their social networks, for example, tra<U+FB03>c safety from crossing busy roads and personal safety
                         from bullies
Activities             Activities includes to all actions undertaken during the route to school, for example riding bikes and listening
                         to music
Travel to School       Qualities of travel to school are those that impact on the time, duration or value placed on an aspect of the
                         school route, such as ease of and the duration of travel

674          V. EGLI ET AL.
                                                                    Built
                            Talking        Acvies
                                                                Environment
Figure 2. Framework for children’s travel to school.
    “pretty long that’s why I like it” m_car_older
    “its far so it gives me time to talk to my friends” m_public_older
With regards to the street network, children who walked indicated that they liked shortcuts and that
they didn’t have to cross many roads:
    “I get to go through the park” m_walk_younger
    “I don’t have to cross any big roads” f_walk_older
Some children whom were driven were aware of whether the drive was convoluted or straight and
how long it might take when it was clear compared to during the school rush.
    Boys from primary schools like being able to stop at shops on their route to or from school:
    “go to the shops and buy food with my friends” m_walk_older
The most commonly cited factor disliked by children was tra<U+FB03>c exposure. There were no di<U+FB00>erences
between boys and girls, but a greater number of younger (primary school-aged) children commented
on tra<U+FB03>c than older (intermediate school-aged) children. Those that were driven to school did not
like that tra<U+FB03>c on the roads made their commute longer, whereas those who walked mentioned how
cars made it di<U+FB03>cult to cross the road. 35 (3%) children speci<U+FB01>cally mentioned not liking having to
cross roads:
    “we have to cross the roads a lot” f_walk_older
    “I also don’t like when cars are speeding past me when i and other kids are trying to cross the road.”
    f_walk_older
Three times as many younger children than older children, and more girls than boys (51; 59% vs. 35;
41%) disliked that their car journey to school was too long. This was more common if they got stuck

                                                                                      CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES             675
in tra<U+FB03>c. On the other hand, a few older students indicated that they would prefer a longer walking
route:
    “i don’t like that it’s not long enough because i’d like to run more or <U+FB01>t in more activity” m_car_younger
Social environment
With regards to the social environment, there were 124 (15% of the 852 total) and 362 (43% of the
851 total) answers to the ‘what do you like?’ and ‘what do you like to do?’ questions, respectively. It
was clear that children saw their journey to school as a good opportunity to play and talk with friends
and family. Who these interactions were with depended on the mode of transport, with children who
walk and take the bus enjoying interacting with their friends, whereas those who are driven appre-
ciating time with family members:
    “i like that we get to pick up up my friend so we can walk together” f_walk_older
    “I like to sit down and talk to my mum in the car” f_car_younger
The volume of responses indicated that journeying with friends was most important to younger boys,
and that talking with parents and siblings was most enjoyed by older girls. The appreciation of this
chance to socialise was further highlighted by those who did not get this opportunity:
    “i don’t like that i can’t walk to school with my friends” m_walk_younger
    “you dont get to stop and say hi to friends” f_car_younger
Using the bus meant that they could catch up with those they wouldn’t otherwise see during the day:
    “i like that i get to see my friends on the bus that aren’t in my class” m_public_younger
There were few dislikes regarding interactions with the social environment (363;18% references vs. a
combined 1691;82% for like and like to do). Those that were mentioned were almost exclusively from
younger children who used the bus and found it crowded and noisy:
    “i don’t like that on the bus there’s too much noise and it gets full fast because there are heaps of people getting
    on the bus” m_public_older
When comparing interactions with friends to those with parents or siblings, there were more nega-
tive comments regarding family members than friends:
    “That my sister always annoys me on the way” m_car_younger
Interestingly, the majority of these (20/28; 71%) were responses of children whom travelled by car:
    “when we <U+FB02>ight with my brother in the car” m_car_older
Natural environment
Environmental factors were important to both younger and older children who commented that they
did not like noise or air pollution:
    “Don’t like pollution from cars” m_walk_older
    “when cars beep the horn … ..it hurts my ears” m_walk_younger
Children enjoyed walking though natural, green spaces and did not like it when they encountered
litter, particularly glass:
    “I like looking at the view and being relaxed” f_walk_older
    “Lots of glass and cracks in the pavement” m_walk_older

676          V. EGLI ET AL.
There were 95 mentions of hills of which 53 (56%) were negative. Most comments (60%) were made
by primary school boys who walked. Intuitively, children liked walking down hills in one direction,
but not up in the other:
    “there are a lot of downhills and also <U+FB02>at. But it’s hard to go back because it’s uphills” f_scooter_older
Some children (3%) mentioned they disliked the extremes of the weather conditions in Auckland,
New Zealand:
    “no shelter gets hot when its sunny” f_car_older
    “sometimes when it’s rainy I don’t like” f_car_older
Safety
There were only a small number of references to safety: 72 (52%) positives and 66 (48%) negatives.
Most were general comments describing the route as safe although a few went into more detail about
how they like being able to avoid road crossings or tra<U+FB03>c and being surrounded by people:
    “its not hard to cross the road and I dont get scared of being hit by a car” m_scooter_older
    “i know a lot of people so i feel really safe because i leave early in the morning” f_walk_older
On the other hand, where cars and busy roads were an issue, children were perceptive to the quality
of driving they encountered:
    “sometimes people drive very crazy” f_car_younger
    “these cars rush out of the drive way and we are pretty close to them making them dangerous” m_car_younger
Notably, the most frequently mentioned dislike relating to safety was primary school boys’ aversion
to dogs:
    “i dislike when my friends dog is outside and i need to wait until it goes inside so i can walk past to keep walking
    to school” m_walk_younger
Activities
In line with what children said they liked about the social environment, the most commonly reported
activity was talking with friends and family:
    “I also like to talk to my mum or my dad (depending on who drops me o<U+FB00>) about everything” f_car_older
Time spent travelling to school was also used for play. Children who used AST more often reported
that their play was active, whereas children who were driven played either video (using mobile
phones) or imagination games:
    “on my bike and my scooter i like to do jumps” m_bike_younger
    “Pretend that I am running on the powerlines” m_car_younger
Ball games were particularly popular, with children bouncing, kicking or passing basketballs, foot-
balls, handballs and rugby balls. Some children were able to use the school facilities before travelling
home:
    “sometimes I play playground before I leave” m_walk_younger
    Many children who are driven to school, and some that walk, liked to listen or sing to music either
on the radio or on their mobile phones:
    “I like to listen to music in the car” f_car_younger

                                                                                CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES 677
    “I sometimes sing while walking” f_walk_younger
Interestingly, of the 39 mentions of electronic devices, only nine (23%) of them were by children who
walked. Use of devices by children using both active and passive travel was the same; either to listen-
ing to music or playing games.
    Children who travelled to school by bus or car also frequently mentioned that they liked to look
out the window and take in what was going on around them:
    “i like to look at everything (the view outside your window)” f_car_younger
    “just sit and watch outside” f_car_older
Comments from children who walked were more contemplative compared to children taking the
time to re<U+FB02>ect on school, take in their surroundings or think more generally:
    “i like thinking about my day” f_walk_younger
    “Looking around to see what is coming and discover something” m_walk_older
Travel to school
As data were being coded, it became clear that children simply enjoyed the action of walking, and
preferred walking to being driven:
    “its a nice walk to school” m_walk_younger
    “i like that i don’t have to go in a car” m_bike_younger
A small number of children stated that they did not like that they were ‘not allowed to walk’ m_car_-
older. Few children said that they liked being in the car and those that did enjoyed it because ‘it’s
quicker than just walking’ m_car_younger
    Some children in this study reported being conscious of the bene<U+FB01>ts to their health and well-being
that they experience by walking:
    “i like that it’s fun and it helps me stay <U+FB01>t” m_walk_younger
    “i <U+FB01>nd it quite relaxing” m_walk_older
Reasons children gave for not liking to walk, referred to the built and natural environments with
regards to the distance and hills, respectively, as opposed to walking itself.
    Overall, most older children either liked using the bus because they got to spend time with friends
or disliked it because it was busy and crowded. Only a few children thought that using the bus was
enjoyable in itself:
    “you can catch the bus which is fun” f_public_older
Furthermore, numerous children noted that the bus was often unreliable:
    “sometimes the bus is late or full” m_public_older
    “it sometimes doesnt come” m_public_older
Similarly, attitudes towards being driven in the car were largely determined by external factors e.g.
tra<U+FB03>c although one girl said that she likes ‘that i am in the car’ f_car_older, and some children ‘sleep
because it’s a long drive’ m_public_older.
Discussion
The aim of this research was to understand preferences and perceptions about the route to school of
a large group of New Zealand children, from their own perspective, using PPGIS. This paper presents

678         V. EGLI ET AL.
an evidence-based framework for understanding and measuring children’s likes, dislikes, and key
activities for their route to school. Perspectives of over 1100 children living in Auckland, New Zeal-
and were aggregated and contextualised within extant literature. According to children, the most
commonly mentioned feature of a route was its time or distance, with most children liking that
their school was close to home. The social interactions enjoyed by children on either their active
or passive travel to school is an important <U+FB01>nding for parents, schools, public health practitioners
and town/city planners alike. This time spent with friends and family was perhaps most likely to
be spent talking but, could also be used as an opportunity to play. This play was often active
when children were not con<U+FB01>ned to a vehicle. When natural environments such as bush or parks
were mentioned, attitudes were unanimously positive and appeared to be associated with safer routes
where fewer cars would be encountered. Findings provide child-centred evidence that can help
inform future interventions to increase AST.
    School policies to reduce ‘door to door’ chau<U+FB00>euring by promoting mixed modes of travel (i.e.
walk plus car) would increase rates of active travel among children for whom car travel is a necessity.
Speci<U+FB01>c interventions could include moving the designated drop o<U+FB00> and pick up area away from the
front of school gates to allow children an opportunity to walk one or two blocks until their caregiver
picks them up. This would increase mix modes of travel and reduce tra<U+FB03>c around school gates.
Additionally, locating schools within residential areas would reduce the distance to school for chil-
dren attending their local school. Locating schools on the outside of suburbs decreases the likelihood
of children using active modes of travel to/from school (Giles-Corti et al. 2011).
    For children who actively travel to school, getting to know places and people in their neighbour-
hoods can be associated with important child development milestones speci<U+FB01>cally spatial knowledge,
safety perceptions and social interactions (Villanueva et al. 2016; Waygood et al. 2017). Our <U+FB01>ndings
indicated that during the school travel route, children had di<U+FB00>erent and more complex ways in which
they used their time than previously described. Beyond only walking, only cycling or only being dri-
ven, our child-centred approach gave children the opportunity to voice that they often combined
activities, for example ‘biking and exploring new tracks with friends’, ‘sitting in the car and talking
to mum about my day’.
    These child voices may echo those of their parents (Jennings and Niemi 1968), however, it cannot
be ignored that children in this study are acutely aware of driving quality, congestion, noise and par-
ticulate matter pollution. These <U+FB01>ndings align with research conducted among European children,
who also described tra<U+FB03>c and noise pollution as built environment risks to health (Stansfeld et al.
2005; Pluhar et al. 2009). Such observations reinforce issues reported by adults and should be con-
sidered when developing policies to promote AST because it is likely that these barriers will in<U+FB02>uence
future behaviour when children’s mobility is fully independent.
    While research indicates that contemporary parents spend as much or more time with children as
in the past (Bianchi 2000; Sandberg and Ho<U+FB00>erth 2001; Bianchi, Robinson, and Milke 2006) evidence
also suggests parents perceive challenges in getting enough time with their children while they juggle
family life with paid work and other obligations (Milkie et al. 2004). Trip-chaining has emerged as
one way that parents manage school drop o<U+FB00> and pick up with commuting to places of employment
(Carver, Timperio, and Crawford 2013). While it may not seem ‘front of mind’ for parents, children
in this study who were chau<U+FB00>eured to school reported that spending time with family members in
the car, talking about their day, singing together, listening to music, or playing games were the things
they most liked to do. Time-squeezed parents may not realise that time spent in the car is an impor-
tant time to connect with children, but children in this study report that it is. Increasing awareness of
this opportunity among parents could help mitigate parental perceptions of time scarcity and
increase children’s socialisation and everyday connections to parents and caregivers.
    It is likely that, overall, children make the best of their journey to school regardless of mode of
travel. However, given that the majority of negative comments made referred to busy roads and
crowded buses, it seems reasonable to infer that if children are able to walk a short distance with
company, on dedicated paths through green spaces, they would prefer an active over a passive

                                                                         CHILDREN’S GEOGRAPHIES        679
commute (Hinckson 2016). This has important implications for town/city planning policies. Based
on this research, creating sidewalks away from busy roads and through natural spaces may create
‘shorter distances’ for active school travellers (D’Haese et al. 2011) as well as contribute to additional
bene<U+FB01>ts to health and well-being including, but not limited to, those from physical activity, social
interactions, development opportunities and restorative connections with nature (Carver et al.
2010; Chaudhury et al. 2019).
Strengths and limitations
This study was strengthened by a large and diverse sample size of over 1,100 children from a large,
socioeconomically and culturally diverse city. The content analysis of open-ended survey questions
using both inductive and deductive methods makes it comparable to previous research but also
ensures that novel ideas and key concepts are not missed. One of the limitations of this study is
that some of the context of the communication behind the responses may have been missed. This
may have occured due to the succinct nature of the PPGIS survey when compared to qualitative
interview or focus group methods. This lack of further probing allowed for a larger sample size of
children to be included in the research, however it also meant that detailed insights and/or confusing
responses could not be clari<U+FB01>ed.
    A strength of this study was the child-centred approach that taken. For example, no adult-centric
guidelines were given to children regarding travel modes, thereby allowing children to decide and
report on their usual travel mode themselves. This respected children’s ability to answer questions
about their own experiences (Jones 2008). A limitation of this approach meant that in the analysis
of open-ended survey responses it was not possible to distinguish between a child who walked a long
distance to school and one who walked a very short distance if the child did not state this themselves.
It is known that distance to school and socio-economic status are signi<U+FB01>cant correlates of AST in
children and may in<U+FB02>uence their travel to school perceptions and preferences (Rothman et al.
2018; Ikeda et al. In Press) and this study is limited by not accounting for this in the analysis.
    Future research opportunities exist to build upon this work using child-centred research methods.
Focus groups could be conducted where children are asked to elaborate on the questions asked,
including researcher promoting for detail and clari<U+FB01>cation. In these focus groups children could
also be asked to provide their feedback into the framework developed and it could be adjusted as
needed. Additional research opportunities exist for greater understanding of the importance of socia-
lisation during the trip to/from school. For example, there are opportunities for qualitative research
and co-design interventions to enhance socialisation and communication between parents and chil-
dren during the route to/from school.
Conclusion
This study presents the results from a large sample of children aged 8–13 years, using a child-centred
approach to understand the perceptions and preferences of children’s routes to school. This everyday
activity is important for physical activity accumulation, cognitive and proprioceptive development,
socialisation and is an important opportunity for engaging in restorative experiences in nature.
Overall, our results indicate children are primarily concerned with the time/distance of the route
to school. Children who actively travel to school are aware of tra<U+FB03>c safety and air pollution and pre-
fer commuting with friends and/or family members. Children who travelled by public transport
reported that buses were often overcrowded and/or unreliable but that they enjoyed spending the
time with friends. Children who were chau<U+FB00>eured in cars reported time spent in the car with parents
or caregivers was enjoyable because of the opportunity it a<U+FB00>orded them to talk about their day and/or
listen to music and sing together. To confer bene<U+FB01>ts to child health and well-being the results from
this study support that sidewalks be located away from busy roads to allow travel through natural
spaces, and that schools consider located pick up and drop o<U+FB00> zones away from the front of school

680          V. EGLI ET AL.
gates in order to a<U+FB00>ord children the opportunity to walk and cycle. Additionally, interventions to
increase parental awareness that time spent chau<U+FB00>euring children in cars is important for socialisa-
tion and connection may help to alleviate parental concerns over time scarcity.
Disclosure statement
No potential con<U+FB02>ict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This study was supported by the Health Research Council of New Zealand (grant number 14/436). MS is supported by
a Health Research Council of New Zealand Sir Charles Hercus Research Fellowship (grant number 17/013).
ORCID
V. Egli     http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3306-7709
L. Mackay        http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7344-5794
C. Jelleyman       http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3228-8566
E. Ikeda      http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6999-3918
M. Smith        http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0987-2564
References
Auckland Council. 2014. Auckland Pro<U+FB01>le: Initial Results from the 2013 Census. Auckland: Auckland Council.
Baslington, Hazel. 2008. “School Travel Plans: Overcoming Barriers to Implementation.” Transport Reviews 28 (2):
   239–258.
Beazley, Harriot, Sharon Bessell, Judith Ennew, and Roxana Waterson. 2009. The Right to be Properly Researched:
   Research with Children in a Messy, Real World. Taylor & Francis.
Bianchi, Suzanne M. 2000. “Maternal Employment and Time with Children: Dramatic Change or Surprising
   Continuity?” Demography 37 (4): 401–414.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., John P. Robinson, and Melissa A. Milke. 2006. The Changing Rhythms of American Family Life.
   Russell Sage Foundation.
Black, Dan A., Natalia Kolesnikova, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2014. “Why do so Few Women Work in New York (and so
   Many in Minneapolis)? Labor Supply of Married Women Across US Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 79: 59–71.
Brown, Greg, Jennifer Strickland-Munro, Halina Kobryn, and Susan A. Moore. 2017. “Mixed Methods Participatory
   GIS: An Evaluation of the Validity of Qualitative and Quantitative Mapping Methods.” Applied Geography 79:
   153–166.
Carr, Victoria, and Eleanor Luken. 2014. “Playscapes: A Pedagogical Paradigm for Play and Learning.” International
   Journal of Play 3 (1): 69–83.
Carroll, P., K. Witten, R. Kearns, and P. Donovan. 2015. “Kids in the City: Children’s Use and Experiences of Urban
   Neighbourhoods in Auckland, New Zealand.” Journal of Urban Design. doi:10.1080/13574809.2015.1044504.
Carver, Alison, Anna Timperio, and David Crawford. 2013. “Parental Chau<U+FB00>eurs: What Drives their Transport
   Choice?” Journal of Transport Geography 26: 72–77.
Carver, Alison, Anna Timperio, Kylie Hesketh, and David Crawford. 2010. “Are Children and Adolescents Less Active
   if Parents Restrict Their Physical Activity and Active Transport Due to Perceived Risk?” Social Science & Medicine
   70 (11): 1799–1805.
Chaudhury, M., E. Hinckson, H. Badland, and M. Oliver. 2019. “Children’s Independence and A<U+FB00>ordances
   Experienced in the Context of Public Open Spaces: A Study of Diverse Inner-City and Suburban
   Neighbourhoods in Auckland, New Zealand.” Children’s Geographies 1 (17): 49–63.
Chaufan, Claudia, Jarmin Yeh, Leslie Ross, and Patrick Fox. 2019. “You Can’t Walk or Bike Yourself Out of the Health
   E<U+FB00>ects of Poverty: Active School Transport, Child Obesity, and Blind Spots in the Public Health Literature.” Critical
   Public Health 25 (1): 32–47.
Chillón, Palma, Kelly R. Evenson, Amber Vaughn, and Dianne S. Ward. 2011. “A Systematic Review of Interventions
   for Promoting Active Transportation to School.” International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity
   8 (10). doi:10.1186/1479-5868-8-10.
Delbosc, A., and G. Currie. 2013. “Causes of Youth Licensing Decline: A Synthesis of Evidence.” Transport Reviews 33:
   271–290.

