Traffic stress and bicycling to elementary and junior high school:
Evidence from Davis, California
abstract
The purpose of this study is to examine the influence of stress stemming from proximity to automobile
traffic on bicycling to elementary and junior high school. A growing body of evidence shows that students who walk or bike to school have higher levels of overall physical activity. Turning around thedecline in active travel to school in the U.S. could thus produce improvements in the health and wellbeing of students. Despite considerable research on the influence of the urban environment on walking
to school, a better understanding of the factors specific to bicycling to school is needed. We conducted a
study of bicycling to school in Davis, California using data from repeated observations of bike rack counts
at 11 neighborhood schools. We adopt the bicycle level of traffic stress (BLTS) methodology for estimatingtraffic stress from roadway characteristics as an inverse measure of bicycling comfort. We use Bayesianbinomial multi-level regression models to analyze the influence of traffic stress and other covariates onbike rack counts. Results suggest that changing the street environment to reduce traffic stress (according
to BLTS categorization) along routes to school in concert with encouraging shorter travel distances to
school will increase the number of students bicycling and thereby increase student health. 
1. Introduction
     A growing body of evidence shows that students who walk or bike to school have higher levels of overall physical activity (Alexander et
al., 2005; Cooper et al., 2005; Faulkner et al., 2009; Tudor-Locke et al., 2010). In turn, greater physical activity is associated with lower
incidence of chronic disease and better physical and psychological wellbeing (Humphreys et al., 2013; Martin et al., 2014). This association
is especially important considering the increasing prevalence of obesity-related diseases (e.g. type II diabetes, cardiovascular disease), and
the tracking of health from childhood to adulthood (Biddle et al., 2004; Telama et al., 2014). Although the direct relationship between
active travel to school and general measures of health is uncertain (Davison et al., 2008; Heelan et al., 2005; Lubans et al., 2011; Rosenberg
et al., 2006; Tudor-Locke et al., 2010), it is reasonable to expect mostly positive effects. Indeed, at least one study has documented a
relationship between bicycling to school and cardiorespiratory fitness (Cooper et al., 2006).
     The Netherlands and Denmark stand out as the two countries with high bicycling to school rates, on the order of 45–60% (Jensen, 2008;
Kemperman and Timmermans, 2014). In Scandinavia, active travel rates (combined walking and bicycling) are also high (45–68%)
(Johansson et al., 2012). All of these countries have well established policies promoting bicycling to school which include education and
road improvements. These programs are also set within the broader contexts of major national investments for bicycling and substantial
national bicycling cultures (Jensen, 2008; Pucher and Dijkstra, 2003). Besides these success stories, active travel to school rates are particularly low in many comparable Western countries. In Australia, active travel to school rates have declined from 37% in 1985 to 26% in
2001 (Hume et al., 2009); in Canada, active travel rates are moderate (30–44% from 1996–2001) (Pabayo et al., 2011); and in the US, the
percentage of active travel to school declined from 41% in 1969 to 13% in 2009 (McDonald, 2007; McDonald et al., 2011). Considering
bicycling is just a fraction of the overall active travel to school rates in these countries (McDonald et al., 2011; Salmon et al., 2005), the
opportunity to improve student health by increasing the percentage of bicycling to school is substantial.
     In the US, safe routes to school (SRTS) programs, first established in the 1990s, have been the primary mechanism for encouraging
active travel to school. The benefits of SRTS could go far beyond improvements in student health, as improvements on schools’ routes
contribute to an improved environment for active travel throughout the community (Watson and Dannenberg, 2008) and because
increasing bicycling among children now has the potential to instill behaviors that will last into adulthood (Johansson, 2005). Despite the
loss of dedicated federal funding for such programs with the passage of the current transportation bill (MAP-21), it is clear that the legacy
of SRTS has continued, helped along by the continuation of a national SRTS partnership (Safe Routes to School National Partnership, 2005).
As of Summer 2015, federal SRTS programs have channeled over $1 billion of funding toward active travel to school (National Center for
Safe Routes to School, 2015), with the majority of the funding going toward physical improvements to the road environment (Cradock et
al., 2012). However, the most common investment has been directed toward walking (i.e. sidewalk improvements) rather than bicycling
(National Center for Safe Routes to School, 2011). Two circumstances may explain the limited attention to bicycling in SRTS programs: the
very low share of bicycling in most US communities among children as well as adults, and a limited understanding on the part of
transportation planners of the most effective strategies for encouraging bicycling to school.
     The choice to bike to school has been conceptualized as a joint choice between the student and caregiver, with greater student
influence on the joint choice with increasing student age (McMillan, 2005; Mitra, 2013). The Previous research shows that bicycling to
school depends on access to bicycles, distance/time from home to school, parent work schedules, and weather (Emond and Handy, 2012;
McMillan, 2007, 2005; Mitra, 2013; Schlossberg et al., 2006). Attitudes and perceptions about bicycling on the part of both students and
parents are also important, and reflecting this, widely reported barriers to bicycling to school are neighborhood and traffic safety (Hume et
al., 2009; McMillan, 2005). However, the influence of the street environment (e.g. cycle paths, bike lanes, traffic speed, etc.) on bicycling to
school is not well studied, and current evidence is inconsistent across cities and countries (Boarnet et al., 2005; Carver et al., 2014; Ewing
et al., 2004; Jensen, 2008; McMillan, 2007; Panter et al., 2010). Research into the relationship between the street environment and the
decision to bicycle to school using novel measures that more directly reflect bicycling barriers could provide better guidance to planners
on promoting bicycling to school as one part of a large portfolio of programs and policies promoting bicycling in general (Pucher et al.,
2010).
     This paper focuses on how traffic safety, measured using a method of categorizing roadways and intersections based on their theo-
retical “traffic stress” on a bicyclist, influences bicycling to school. While there are numerous methods for classifying roadways based on
suitability for bicycling (e.g. bicycle level of service (Landis et al., 1997), bicycle compatibility index (Harkey et al., 1998)), we used the
bicycle level of traffic stress (BLTS)1 method (Furth and Mekuria, 2013) because (a) it is relatively easy to apply over entire urban areas,
(b) takes into account characteristics specifically focused on traffic safety, and (c) uses descriptive language geared toward young bicyclists.
In this paper we address two questions: (1) to what extent is there a relationship between traffic stress on routes to school and bike rack
counts at elementary and junior high schools? (2) how effective might road improvements that reduce traffic stress be in increasing the
number of students bicycling to school?
2. Methods
2.1. Setting and data collection
     In this study we examine bicycling to elementary and junior high school in Davis, California, well known for having among the highest
levels of bicycling in the US. We use data from repeated observations of bike rack counts at 11 neighborhood schools in Davis over the
course of 2½ school years (2012–2015), with a range from 11 to 30 mornings counted for each school, resulting in a total of 214 morning
observations (see Table 1). This method of estimating bike mode share to school is easy to implement and very cost effective, therefore it
can be applied in any school setting that has observable bike parking. In order to preserve sample size, bike rack counts are our unit of
analysis, but we often present aggregated results as bike mode share (calculated as bike rack count divided by enrollment). The key
explanatory variables considered in this study are measures of distance and BLTS (i.e. the likely stress imposed on a bicyclist by automobile
traffic). This methodology assigns traffic stress for each segment of a network (See Table 2 for a description of each class). For ease of
discussion, we use the term “comfortable” to refer to low traffic stress routes in discussing model results.
     Through semi-automated and manual construction of a Geographic Information System (GIS) network, each link in the network was
classified by traffic stress from level 1 (low stress) to level 4 (high stress) based on street width, presence of bicycle lanes, bicycle lane
barriers, presence of parking lanes, speed limit, and intersection configurations. This network was subdivided into four sub-networks:
BLTS 1 (all links classified as stress level 1), BLTS 2 (all links classified as level 1 or 2 with none at 3 or 4), BLTS 3 (all links classified as level
1, 2, or 3 with none at 4), and BLTS 4 (all links (i.e. the entire network)). We obtained anonymous student home locations during February
2013 from the City of Davis, and used these as the distribution of home locations for each school for all study years. We then calculated the
shortest path from each home location to that student’s school on each of the sub-networks, and then summarized those individual
distances to school by school using two approaches: (1) finding the percentage of students with access to school on each BLTS sub-network regardless of distance, and 2. determining the percentage of students with access to school on each BLTS sub-network within ¼
mile distance bins. After visual inspection of this data (presented in Section 3.1), we generated six comfort variables for use in the statistical
models:
1.  %  of students  with   access   on   BLTS  1
2.  %  of students  with   access   on   BLTS  2
3.  %  of students  with   access   on   BLTS  1 within 1 mile for elementary schools
4.  %  of students  with   access   on   BLTS  2 within 2.5 miles for junior high schools
5.  %  of students  with   access   on   BLTS  2 within 1 mile for elementary schools
6. % of students with access on BLTS 3 within 2.5 miles for junior high schools
    Although we use aggregate data that may not accurately describe individual decision processes (known as the “ecological fallacy”
(Freedman, 2001)), our repeated measures approach helps to ensure that our conclusions about aggregate bicycling are robust. In addition,
planners and policy makers often have only aggregate data to make decisions; therefore, this method is valuable for its practicality.
Another limitation to our approach is that the BLTS methodology has yet to be “validated” across individuals (e.g. related to human
perceptions or other measures of stress) or across geographies. We see this as an important topic for future research, but argue that
bicyclist facility preferences generally align with the descriptions for each BLTS class (Tilahun et al., 2007). Finally, a number of socio-demographic and travel behavior variables (e.g. parent education, caregiver work schedules) that may be important determinants of
bicycling to school were unavailable. Future applications of our method would benefit from incorporating some of these factors when the
data is available.
2.2. Model development and analysis
    We conducted a Bayesian analysis using multilevel binomial regression models to examine the relationship between bike rack counts
at each school (observed on multiple occasions) and comfort variables. The models are estimated with a varying intercept specified for
each school; this pools the variance from each school to improve prediction and explanation. The models are aggregate in that the
dependent variable is the count of bikes at each school on each observation date. In our models, each bike counted is considered a unique
Bernoulli trial (i.e. each student either bikes or does not bike to school). For example, if a school has 500 enrolled students, then for each
observation we estimate 500 Bernoulli trials, each with a possible outcome of 1 or 0, and then sum these results to get an estimated count
of bikes at that school on that observation (see Fitch et al. (in press) for a detailed description of the model structure). Through the R
statistical packages rethinking and rstan as an interface for the probabilistic statistical programming language Stan, we used the No-U-Turn
(NUTS) sampler, a form of Hamiltonian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (McElreath, 2015; Stan Development Team, 2015a, 2015b). We
used the widely applicable information criteria (WAIC) (Watanabe, 2010) for comparing out-of-sample prediction of our models (Gelman
et al., 2013b; Vehtari and Gelman, 2014), and we made inferences about variable effects (and uncertainty) directly from parameter
posterior distributions as opposed to a classical hypothesis tests of the null (e.g. p-values) (Gelman et al., 2013a, p. 95).
    Initial specification of the model of bike rack counts included covariates, justified based on past literature and local anecdotal
observations: day of week, season, Bike to School Day, rain, temperature, race, gender, and share of students qualifying for free or reduced
cost lunches (results not shown). We then compared four model specifications to examine the relationship between BLTS measures and
rates of bicycling to school. Model A includes mean distance and no comfort variables to provide a baseline against which to assess how
much the comfort variables in other models add to the prediction of bike rack counts. Model B maintains the mean distance variable and
adds comfort variables 1 and 2. This model corresponds to our hypothesis that in Davis, where distances to school are generally short, the
effect of distance and comfortable access may be independent, meaning a greater percentage of students with comfortable access will lead
to greater biking regardless of distance. Model C drops mean distance and adds comfort variables 3 and 4, which combine comfortable
access with distance. This model follows the hypothesis that distance moderates the effect of comfortable access, and that comfortable
access is best described by BLTS 1 and 2 for elementary and junior high students, respectively, based on the assumption that junior high
students have a greater tolerance for traffic stress than elementary students. Model D is similar to Model C except that it uses comfort
variables 5 and 6 in place of 3 and 4. This model follows the same hypothesis of Model C except that it assumes that comfortable access is
better described by allowing slightly more traffic stress: BLTS 2 and 3 for elementary and junior high students, respectively (see Table 3 for
model specification details). In accordance with the Bayesian analysis framework, we specified prior probabilities for all unknown model
parameters. We specified weakly informative (or regularizing) priors to guard against overfi>tting (McElreath, 2015).
3. Results
3.1. Descriptive results
    Bicycle rack counts in Davis show that junior high schools have a higher number of students bicycling to school than do elementary
schools (Table 2). The median proportion of students bicycling to school in Davis ranges from 11% at Pioneer elementary to 47% at Holmes
Junior High (Fig. 1), all of which are considerably greater than the U.S. average of around 1% (McDonald et al., 2011). Intra-school variability
is consistently high, especially at elementary schools where bike rack counts have standard deviations of 18 to 55 students. Similarly, inter-school variability is large with some schools having twice the bike mode share of others. Distances to school are larger for junior high
schools (Table 2, Fig. 1) with the exception of Cesar Chavez Elementary (a magnet elementary school that draws students from throughout
the city).
    The relationship between student distances to school by BLTS networks and aggregate bike mode shares are presented in Fig. 1 as
distance histograms. Schools with more students located nearby tend to have higher bike mode shares, but not always. Schools with more
students living near the school with BLTS1 and BLTS2 access also tend to have greater bike mode shares. The notable exception is Korematsu Elementary, where nearly every student has access to school via BLTS 1 or 2 with less than 1.5 miles of riding each way, and yet
two other elementary schools have consistently greater bike mode shares. Pioneer and Chavez elementary schools are also outliers in that
Pioneer has a fairly small share of students with comfortable access nearby, and no students with comfortable access beyond approximately 1 mile, and Chavez has a nearly uniform distribution of student distances to school from 0 to 5 miles. Looking for a distance
threshold to test variables that combine distance with comfortable access, we used this visualization to decide on 1 and 2.5 miles for
elementary and junior high schools, respectively, as cutoffs because they showed good variation between schools and are reasonable
bicycling distances for students at those grade levels.
3.2. Model results
    All model parameters have Gaussian-like posterior densities (besides st. dev. school which is constrained to be positive), and thus we
summarize the parameters by their mean and standard deviation (Table 3). All models show consistent effects of the covariates pertaining
to type of day and characteristics of the school demographics. Conditional on the model specifications, schools with a high Hispanic
percentage have more bicycling, while those with a high Black percentage have less bicycling. The effect of percentage male students was
positive but extremely uncertain, while the percentage of students with access to free or reduced lunches (indicator of low household
income) was confidently negative. Low temperatures and presence of rain both have an expected negative effect. The effect of Fridays, on
which travel may be less habitual due to weekend plans, was also negative on bicycling rates. All of these covariates are stable across all
four models.
    In Model A, conditional on all the covariate effects, mean distance has a mean parameter estimate that is small (near 0) with a large
standard deviation indicating the posterior distribution spans almost equally over the positive and negative range. This indicates that we
cannot make confident conclusions about the effect of distance on bicycling to school. Similarly, Model B shows that the effect of mean
distance is inconclusive with a slightly more positive but also wider posterior distribution. Model B also suggests that, conditional on the
covariates, students with access on BLTS levels 1 and 2 may be more likely to bicycle, however a great portion of the posterior distribution
spans the positive and negative range making these effects inconclusive.
    Models C and D consider the effect of comfort within distance thresholds. Model C shows that, conditional on all the covariates, percent
of BLTS 1 access to elementary schools within 1 mile (comfort 3) has a positive influence on bicycling, although the magnitude of the
positive effect still has considerable uncertainty. Similarly, this model shows the same result for percent of BLTS 2 access to junior high
schools within 2.5 miles (comfort 4), with a somewhat stronger effect. Model D exhibits the same general effects of comfort 5 and 6 for
elementary and junior high schools, with slightly dampened effects and smaller parameter standard deviations.
    The models are effectively equivalent in their expected out-of-sample prediction of bike rack counts, as indicated by their effectively
equivalent WAIC values in Table 3. This is also observed through the relatively equal Akaike weight given to each model (Table 3). Because
of this, we employed an ensemble technique to average the predictions of all four models using the Akaike weights to conservatively
evaluate predictions given model uncertainty (McElreath, 2015). Results indicate that the ensemble model predictions of daily bike rack
counts have considerable uncertainty (not shown), but predictions of median bike rack counts are accurate (as indicated by the overlap in
the prediction confidence interval and the observed median in Fig. 2).
4. Discussion
    These results demonstrate that the relationship between comfort variables and bike rack counts is positive but uncertain. Results in
Fig. 1 shows a general correlation between schools with a high share of students having comfortable access and schools with high
bicycling mode shares (evident from the taller BLTS 1 and 2 bars at shorter distances to school for schools with greater bike mode share).
However, inter-school variation somewhat obscures this correlation which is why we focus our discussion on our multivariate analysis. In
our multivariate analysis, our statistical models have equivalent WAIC values suggesting that each model has equivalent predictive power.
Although we expected WAIC to improve when adding comfort variables, it does not hinder our inferences that comfort variables help
explain bicycling. We suspect the equivalent WAICs are related to the large measurement error which is added to the comfort variables
when we aggregate from individuals to schools. We also suspect that there exists an important omitted variable (or variables) because
after examining daily model residuals (not shown), all of the models have a particularly difficult time predicting bicycling on Wednesdays.
This is likely because elementary schools have shortened school days and junior highs have late starts on Wednesdays. Because of this,
even though we have a dummy variable for Wednesdays, we argue that we are likely missing a covariate related to flexibility of caregiver
work schedules. For example, if a caregiver normally accompanies their child to school by bicycling with them, but does not have the time
given the shortened school day, they might instead resort to driving their child to school. This is a difficult variable to estimate in the
aggregate, and so we let our results stand with this caveat.
    Model results show that distance and comfortable access, independent of each other, are less associated with bicycling than when
combined (see comfort variable parameter estimates for Models B, C, and D in Table 3). In addition, BLTS 2 and 3 access (comfort 5 and
6) were nearly as influential as BLTS 1 and 2 access (comfort 3 and 4) which suggests that in Davis, parents and students may be
accepting of a moderate level of traffic stress. In this light, these results indicate, at least for Davis, that improving roads from BLTS
2 to 1 for elementary access and BLTS 3 to 2 for junior high access might have limited effects on bicycling levels. However, care must
be taken in other communities before making this determination because it is expected that comfortable bicycling environments and
social cultures of bicycling are reciprocally causal. In Davis, the bicycling culture may increase the perception (and perhaps reality, i.e.
safety in numbers (Jacobsen, 2003)) that bicycling is safe and comfortable even if each roadway is not completely free of traffic stress
(Handy, 2011).
    A surprising result was the inconclusive evidence for the influence of distance, in contrast to other studies of active travel to school
in the U.S. that have shown distance to be influential (Emond and Handy, 2012; Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald, 2008). However,
considering that the schools in Davis have much shorter network distances to school compared to the national average (mean of
1.4 miles compared to 4.4 miles nationally (McDonald et al., 2011)), it may be that distance to schools in Davis is less of a constraint
compared to other cities. Alternatively, it may be that mean distance is too coarse of a metric in Davis, but that when comfort and
proximity are combined (e.g. Models C and D), distance does matter. In environments where distance to school is short on average (1 mile in Perth, Western Australia), a small negative effect (odds ratio E 0.8) of distance (km) on biking to school has been reported
(Trapp et al., 2011). In the aggregate our results are too uncertain to make this claim, but we might expect a similar mean effect in
Davis had we data on individual mode choice; indeed the effect of distance on mode choice for high school students in Davis is
similar: Emond and Handy (2012) report a mean coefficient of  0.242 (distance in miles) which is equivalent to an odds ratio E 0.85
for distance (km).3
    To address our second major research question of how effective road improvements aimed at decreasing traffic stress along routes to
schools would be at increasing bicycling to school, we generated counterfactual plots for Model C which demonstrate the expected
bicycling mode share (e.g. bike rack counts/enrollment) given three scenarios of comfort variables 3 and 4: (1) 0% of students have access
to school on BLTS 1 and 2 for elementary and junior high, respectively, (2) 50% of students have access to school on BLTS 1 and 2 for
elementary and junior high, respectively, and (3) 100% of students have access to school on BLTS 1 and 2 for elementary and junior high,
respectively (Fig. 3). We chose Model C because it is slightly more conservative in the estimated effect of traffic stress compared to Model D.
Importantly, a policy based on the guidance of Model C would both focus road improvement projects on short routes schools and
encourage shorter travel distances to school (e.g. through incentives to attend neighborhood schools). Fig. 3 shows the expected rates of
bicycling to school with varying BLTS 1 and 2 access within the distance thresholds. Model C clearly shows a consistent increase in mean
bicycling rate with an increased share of students having comfortable access within the distance thresholds. This is especially true for the
three schools with the lowest bicycling mode shares (Chavez, Montgomery, and Pioneer), suggesting that focusing policies on schools with
the lowest bicycling rates may have a slightly larger impact than on schools with moderate bicycling rates, although the uncertainty
around these estimates is large.
    We offer three possible methodological explanations as to why the influence of comfortable access and distance on bicycling rates
is uncertain. First, we only considered a sample of origins from one school year as representing the origins for all three years of data
(because of limited data availability). It may be that the variability in origins due to student matriculation over time is the cause for
the uncertainty in the effects of comfortable access and distance. Second, aggregating individual route information at the school level
removed all the intra-school variability from the analysis; this intra-school variability may be very important in estimating the effects
of comfort and distance on aggregated bike rack counts. Third, it is possible that the BLTS classification is not an appropriate measure
of traffic stress for young students. Although Fig. 3 exhibits considerable uncertainty in the effect of comfortable access, it is
important to note that when 0% of students have comfortable access, bike mode shares are considerably lower than they currently are
in Davis. This suggests that if students did not have comfortable bicycling access within short distances from their school, bike mode
shares at all schools would drop. Conversely, it also suggests that even when 0% of students have comfortable access, bike mode
shares would still stay moderately high (10-15%) suggesting a good portion of students are willing to bike (and their parents are
willing to let them bike) with added traffic stress.
     Future analysis should explore alternative roadway characteristics (other than those in BLTS) that might contribute to a classification
that has more certain effects on bicycling to school. In particular there is a need to better understand acute stress when bicycling in traffic
through surveys, ride along and standard interviews, and possibly psychophysiological measurements. There is also a need to look across
geographical contexts to explore if and how people adapt to traffic stress. Because Davis is a unique bicycling environment in the U.S., one
might argue that our results would not generalize to other environments. We agree that it would be a mistake to expect effects such as
those from the counterfactual plot (Fig. 3) to directly transfer to other cities, but our method of estimating traffic stress impacts on bike
mode share is possible anywhere where bikes can be counted. Although the magnitude of the effects may differ, it is reasonable to expect
positive effects in most environments. The effects from these types of comfort variables might even be greater in environments that have
more traffic stress surrounding schools. Although we focus on evaluating BLTS road metrics for bicycling to school to aid infrastructure
planning, numerous other programs and policies are likely needed in most communities to increase bicycling to school. Programs such as
bicycling education and training, social events, and marketing, and policies such as reduced vehicle speed limits, installing guarded bike
parking, and strict traffic enforcement have been used around the world (Pucher et al., 2010). In addition, while we use BLTS to aid our
understanding of bicycling to school, it has the potential to be used for broader purposes; indeed the method was first used to evaluate the
entire citywide connectivity of the bicycling network (i.e. low stress bicycling for all residents) in San Jose, California using aggregate
origin–destination pairs (Furth and Mekuria, 2013).
5. Conclusions
     While traffic stress is just one of many factors influencing bicycling to school, it is likely one of the primary ways in which the
urban environment influences bicycling to school. We find evidence from Davis, CA that schools that have a greater number of
students with access to school by way of relatively comfortable routes (according to BLTS) and within short distances have greater
bike mode shares, conditional on environmental and socio-demographic covariates. Because bicycling to school varies considerably
between and within cities, bike rack counts must be observed locally and the model re-estimated for the local setting before
intervention effects can be reasonably estimated. Nonetheless, the results suggest that changing the street environment to reduce
BLTS classification along routes to school and encouraging shorter travel distances to school will increase the number of students
bicycling.

