An examination of how changing patterns of school travel mode                                                                                      MARK
impact moderate-to-vigorous physical activity among adolescents
over timeAbstract
Background: This study examined temporal variations in school travel mode and whether these
variations predicted changes in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) among adolescents (Grades 9 to 12).
Methods: We analyzed data from Years 1, 2 and 3 of the COMPASS study. Students included inthe analysis were those who had provided information on sociodemographic factors, MVPA andschool travel modes. A <U+FB01>nal longitudinal sample included 19,868 participants for the analysesrelated to travel mode to school (AM period) and 17,678 for the travel mode from school (PMperiod). The proportion of participants who changed their school travel modes between yearswas calculated to determine the stability of school travel mode. Linear-mixed models were usedto examine whether changes in mode predicted changes in MVPA one year later. These modelsadjusted for sociodemographic factors as covariates and accounted for the clustering within schools.Results: Stability in school travel mode was observed for both time periods. Across data collectionwaves, only 9.3% consistently used an active transportation mode in the AM period and 15.6% inthe PM period. Only 2.5% switched from a passive to active mode in the AM period and 3.1% inthe PM period, whereas 3.5% switched from an active to passive mode in the AM period and5.2% in the PM period. No signi<U+FB01>cant association was observed for the AM period. For the PMperiod, the decrease in MVPA was signi<U+FB01>cantly greater in adolescents who switched from anactive to a passive transportation mode than those who remained using a passive transportationmode across years.Conclusion: School travel makes a contribution to the amount of MVPA youth accumulate duringthe school week although evidence for this was restricted to those shifting from active to passivemodes in the afternoon period.
1. Introduction
     Active school transportation (AST), including modes such as walking or cycling (Faulkner et al., 2009), has long been identi<U+FB01>ed as
a potential source of habitual physical activity (Tudor-Locke et al., 2001). Additionally, transportation is an integral part of everyday
life. Through time, active travel practices may develop into an automatic behavior which is easier to sustain in the long term (Lally
and Gardner, 2013). In the context of declining levels of physical activity among children and youth (Tremblay et al., 2016), an
increasing number of studies have focused on the relationship between AST and physical activity, and on interventions to increase
AST (Chillon et al., 2011).
    Previous work has shown that AST makes direct contributions to children's overall physical activity. A systematic review has
reported that accelerometer-measured overall physical activity levels were higher in children who use an active transportation mode
for trips to/from schools than those who travel by car or public transport, with the di<U+FB00>erences of daily moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity (MVPA) ranging from 0 to 45 minutes (Larouche et al., 2014). For example, in one recent study, New Zealand adolescent
active school travellers accumulated 13 and 14 more minutes of MVPA on weekdays and weekend days, respectively (Stewart et al.,
2016). However, most evidence is based on cross-sectional studies.
    Another gap in the literature is that previous research has largely focused on elementary school children. This may re<U+FB02>ect the
typically smaller school catchment areas for elementary school children compared to secondary schools. In turn, this reduces the
distance between home and school to a distance considered walkable (or feasible (D'Haese et al., 2011)) by parents and children and
youth. Accordingly, research attention has perhaps concentrated on the elementary setting where potentially greater mode shifts to
AST may be possible. Studying the e<U+FB00>ects of AST on physical activity among secondary school aged students is crucial because this is
the time at which independent mobility tends to increase (O'Brien et al., 2000). Adolescents are provided with more autonomy to
select travel modes to schools and other places, and of course adolescents can obtain a probationary licence to drive (typically at the
age of 16 in Canada and 14 in the province of Alberta). Also, physical activity appears to track more strongly from adolescence to
adulthood than from childhood to adulthood. Promoting AST during high school may be more in<U+FB02>uential to active travel practices in
adulthood, and thus more likely sustained into early adulthood.
    To date, only two investigations have examined longitudinal associations between AST and physical activity in adolescents
(Carver et al., 2011; Heelan et al., 2005). These studies demonstrated a positive association between school travel modes and
temporal changes in physical activity. One limitation is that both studies only used participants’ school travel mode status at a speci<U+FB01>c
time point to predict prospective physical activity. One Canadian study has reported that adolescents’ engagement in active travel
modes begins to decline after the age of 11 years (Pabayo et al., 2011). Therefore, it is important to account for this temporal
variation in school travel modes when estimating the longitudinal associations between school travel modes and physical activity.
The objectives of the current study are to examine 1) the prevalence and stability of school travel mode over a 1-year period, and 2)
whether changes in AST status predict changes in physical activity across time.
2. Methods
2.1. Sample and population
    The COMPASS study is an ongoing prospective cohort study (2012–2021) designed to examine longitudinal associations between
school policies and programs with youth health behaviours (i.e. physical activity, healthy eating, smoking, and alcohol and marijuana
use) (Leatherdale et al., 2014b). The study collects hierarchical longitudinal data from a convenience sample of secondary schools
and the grade 9 to 12 students attending these schools. Extensive details on the COMPASS host study, including sampling, data
collection and linkage process, are available online (www.compass.uwaterloo.ca).
    The current study utilized linked student-level data from Year 1 (Y1: 2012–2013), Year 2 (Y2:2013-2014) and Year 3 (Y3:2014-
2015) of the COMPASS host study. In Y1, data were collected from 24,173 students (80.2% response rate) from 43 Ontario schools. In
Y2 (when COMPASS was expanded), data were collected from 45,298 students (80.1% participation rate) in 79 Ontario and 10
Alberta secondary schools (all 43 Y1 Ontario schools remained in Y2). In Y3, data were collected from 42,355 students (79.3%
participation rate) in 78 Ontario and 9 Alberta schools who participated in Y2. All eligible grade 9 to 12 students attending these
schools were invited to participate in the study and reported data by completing the COMPASS student questionnaire (Cq) annually.
Missing respondents resulted primarily from scheduled spares or absenteeism at the time of the Cq, and minimally from student or
parent refusal (< 1% annually). The COMPASS study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Board at the University of
Waterloo and participating school board committees.
    As described elsewhere (Qian et al., 2015), unique self-generated identi<U+FB01>cation codes were used to link data sets for three years
and create longitudinal data across Y1, Y2 and Y3. We considered participants who had completed the Cq for at least 2 consecutive
years, which resulted in a longitudinal sample of 26,081 participants. Among this group, we further excluded participants who were
missing data on PA or school transportation modes, or had inconsistent records on sex or ethnicity across years. A <U+FB01>nal longitudinal
sample of 19,868 was included for the analyses related to transportation mode to school and 17,678 for transportation mode from
school, respectively.
2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Physical activity
    At each time point, participants were asked to respond to two items on the Cq about how many minutes of vigorous and moderate
PA they had done on each of the last 7 days. Vigorous PA was de<U+FB01>ned as activities that “increase your heart rate and make you
breathe hard and sweat,” such as jogging, team sports, fast dancing or jump-rope. Moderate PA was de<U+FB01>ned as “lower intensity
activities” such as walking, biking to school and recreational swimming. The responses were then used to construct two PA outcomes.
The <U+FB01>rst was a continuous outcome: the average time spent in MVPA (minutes/day). This outcome was calculated as the total of
combined vigorous and moderate PA time divided by 7 days. The second was a binary outcome: whether the participants met the
Canadian PA guideline of at least 60 min of MVPA per day. These measures have demonstrated a satisfactory 1-week test-retest
reliability (intraclass correlation [ICC]=0.75). The measures were also signi<U+FB01>cantly correlated with accelerometer-measured
behaviours (r=0.31, ICC=0.25). While correlations between self-report and objective measures were low to modest, the results are
comparable to most other studies using accelerometers to validate self-report PA (Leatherdale et al., 2014a).
2.2.2. Transportation modes to/from schools
    At each year, participants reported transportation modes to/from school by responding to two questions: “How do you usually
travel to school” and “How do you usually travel from school” (If you use two or more modes of travel, choose the one that you spend most
time doing). The responses options were 1="By car (as a passenger)", 2="By car (as a driver)" 3="By school bus", 4="By public bus,
subway, or streetcar", 5="By walking", 6="By bicycling", 7="Other", 99="Not Stated". For each year, participants who responded 1, 2,
3, and 4, were assigned a score of 0 indicating a “passive” school transportation status; those responded 5 and 6 were assigned a score
of 1 indicating an “active” school transportation status. Participants who responded 7=“Other” or 99= “Not Stated” or had missing
values were excluded from the analysis. According to students’ response to transportation mode to/from school between two
consecutive years, we divided them into 4 school travel mode shifting groups. “0-0” represents the group of students remained using a
passive mode across years, “0–1” for shifting from passive to active, “1-0” for shifting from active to passive, and “1-1” for those
remained using an active mode across years.
2.2.3. Sociodemographic variables
    Students also reported age in years or grade, and ethnicity. Grade at year 1 was measured as a categorical variable with 4
categories. Ethnicity was a categorical variable with six categories: White, Black, Asian, Aboriginal (First Nations, Métis, Inuit), Latin
American/Hispanic, and other. Urbanity was also included as one of the covariates as it has been found to be signi<U+FB01>cantly associated
with school transportation mode. Students were classi<U+FB01>ed as living in rural, small urban, medium urban, and large urban area based
on their school location. By linking school location to the 2011 Canadian Census data, we classi<U+FB01>ed the participating schools into
1=rural (with a population of less than 1000 or a density of less than 400 people per square kilometre), 2=small urban (with a
population of between 1000 and 29,999), 3=medium urban (with a population of between 30,000 and 99,999) and 4=large urban
(with a population of 100,000 and over).
2.3. Statistical analysis
    Descriptive statistics were calculated for all the study variables and the di<U+FB00>erences between participants included and excluded
were compared. Preliminary analyses were conducted to explore the bivariate relationship between each covariate and the dependent
variable, and all signi<U+FB01>cant variables (p < .05), were retained for the longitudinal analyses.
    The proportion of participants in the four mode shifting groups across years was calculated to determine the stability of AST
status. Linear-mixed models were used to examine whether mode shifting predicted change in MVPA one year later. These models
were strati<U+FB01>ed by time-period (i.e., morning=AM and afternoon=PM), with a 1-year change in MVPA entered as a dependent
variable, mode shift group as the independent variable, and sociodemographic variables as covariates (i.e., sex, race/ethnicity and
urbanity), and accounting for the clustering within schools. To meet the normality assumption, we performed a squared root
transformation on the average MVPA minutes per day. All analyses were conducted using the statistical software package SAS 9.4
(Cary, NC). The procedure PROC MIXED was used for the linear mixed-e<U+FB00>ects models. Residual and studentized residual plots were
used to con<U+FB01>rm model assumptions and <U+FB01>t. Statistical signi<U+FB01>cance was set at p < 0.05 for all analyses.
3. Results
    Descriptive statistics of the study variables are presented in Table 1. The included sample is signi<U+FB01>cantly di<U+FB00>erent from the
excluded sample in terms of age, gender, race/ethnicity, grade, urbanity, MVPA and school travel mode. Changes in travel mode over
one year are presented in Table 2. Stability in travel mode over time observed for both time periods. Approximately 85% and 77% of
the participants remained using a passive transportation mode across years in the AM and PM periods, respectively. Approximately
3% of the participants shifted from a passive to an active transportation mode and 4%-5% switched from an active to a passive
transportation mode. Sociodemographic characteristics of participants in each group are shown in Table 3. Participants in all four
groups in the AM period are similar in terms of composition of gender, race/ethnicity and urbanity. In each group, participants were
more likely to be girls, white, and living in large urban areas. This pattern was consistent in the PM period.
    Results for the mixed-e<U+FB00>ect models are presented in Table 4. For the AM period, there was no statistically signi<U+FB01>cant association
between travel mode group and changes in MVPA over a 1-year period after controlling for sociodemographic covariates (i.e., sex,
race and urbanity). For the PM period, the decrease in MVPA decreased was signi<U+FB01>cantly greater in adolescents who switched from an
active to a passive transportation mode than those who remained using a passive transportation mode across years. In addition to
dichotomizing school travel mode into active versus passive, post-hoc analyses were conducted to examine whether participants’
switching between taking school bus and driving predicts changes in MVPA across time. Results from the post-hoc analyses revealed
no statistically signi<U+FB01>cant associations (data not presented).
4. Discussion
     As expected in the Canadian context (Barnes et al., 2016), only a minority of youth in the sample engaged in AST to (15%) or from
school (23%). The prevalence was lower than a 2009 provincially representative survey of 3633 students in grades 7 through 12 in
Ontario. The corresponding <U+FB01>gures were 23% and 32% for secondary school students (Wong et al., 2011). As a North American
comparison, these rates of AST are higher than those reported in the United States. McDonald et al. (2011) reported that 7.5% of
grades 9–12 students walked or biked to school in 2009. Notably, school travel mode was very stable in the current sample suggesting
school travel mode has been <U+FB01>rmly established by grade 9, and this may have other repercussions for reduced active travel beyond
the school context (Stewart et al., 2016).
     Although mode shifting over the year was relatively rare (3–5%), our <U+FB01>ndings contribute to the evidence base that school travel is
a meaningful source of physical activity. In this case, there was a signi<U+FB01>cant decrease in MVPA among youth who shifted to passive
modes of school travel in the afternoon period. The <U+FB01>nding that this association was only in the afternoon period is likely related to
the morning-afternoon mode shift typically seen in the literature where more children and youth use active travel in the afternoon
period (e.g., Wong et al., 2011). As caregivers may be employed there may be a need to <U+FB01>nd an alternative way to get home with
some children and youth adopting active modes of travel home when the distance is feasible. These factors contribute to an increase
in AST commonly seen in Ontario of at least 10% as we report and others have found (Wong et al., 2011). When youth shift to passive
modes, in this case, for unknown reasons, then this source of physical activity is removed from the day, which we speculate is the
reason for the signi<U+FB01>cant decline in MVPA. More broadly, the present study reinforces the need to consider the temporality of school
travel, the mode shift, as interventions might be more e<U+FB00>ective when targeting either the morning or afternoon periods.
     Taken together, our <U+FB01>ndings suggest that there is a missed opportunity in not attempting to intervene at the secondary school
context. The most recent systematic review of AST interventions identi<U+FB01>ed 14 interventions that all focused on children (from age 5 to
12 years) and were set in elementary schools (Chillon et al., 2011) although one study also included adolescents from middle school
to age 15 years (Staunton et al., 2003). Given the spatial, temporal and age-related variations in school travel mode it is unlikely that
'one size <U+FB01>ts all' interventions will be e<U+FB00>ective in promoting AST in this context (Wong et al., 2011). Rather, the use of school travel
planning may be appropriate. School travel planning is a multi-disciplinary, multi-sectoral, school-speci<U+FB01>c intervention that engages
key stakeholders (e.g., STP facilitator, public health, police o<U+FB03>cials, municipal planners and tra<U+FB03>c engineers, school boards, parents,
youth, school administrators and teachers) in the survey, implementation and evaluation of school travel issues (Green Committee
Canada, 2007). Such an approach has been successfully implemented in elementary schools in Canada (Mammen et al., 2014a;
Mammen et al., 2014b), and has been piloted in 7 secondary schools in Ottawa, Canada (Green Communities Canada, 2012). Given
the greater distances between home and school for secondary students (e.g., average distance of 3.6 miles for elementary children and
5.5 miles for high school students in the United States (McDonald et al., 2011)), it is likely that such plans will need to incorporate
transit-related activity (Durand et al., 2016; Voss et al., 2015) and approaches to encourage and support safe cycling (Yang et al.,
2010).
     There are a number of limitations to the study. First, dichotomizing mode share into active and passive is a limitation as the
determinants and consequences of di<U+FB00>erent modes (e.g., walking versus cycling; taking public transit versus being driven) are
important. For example, it is likely that the use of public transit is associated with similar levels of activity accrued through just
walking trips (Voss et al., 2015). In our post-hoc analyses, we investigated whether participants’ switching between taking school bus
and driving predicts changes in MVPA across time, but no statistically signi<U+FB01>cant association was found. Second, the study was
limited in that all measures were self-reported and physical activity assessment is particularly prone to reporting error. These
limitations should be considered in light of the strengths of the study. With a longitudinal study design, any potential reporting bias is
expected to be consistent between waves, so we should still be able to make valid conclusions. The large sample size of this study
increased the precision of population parameter estimations, which is important for informing public health policies.
     School travel makes a contribution to the amount of MVPA youth accumulate during the school week although evidence for this
was restricted to those shifting from active to passive modes in the afternoon period. Surprisingly little research has addressed how
high school students get to and from school nor implemented and evaluated interventions to promote AST. This is an important policy
and practice gap that needs closer attention in supporting more active and sustainable transport choices that could carry on into early
adulthood.