A dose–response e<U+FB00>ect between built environment characteristics
and transport walking for youths
ABSTRACT
Background: A lack of physical activity can lead to long-term health problems for youths (aged
5–18) worldwide. Built environment characteristics are increasingly being recognized as important factors a<U+FB00>ecting transport walking, a reliable source of overall physical activity for
youths. However, the relationship between built environment characteristics, especially residential density, and youths’ walking for transport purposes (transport walking) remain largely
inconclusive, due to limited variation in built environment variables and an assumption of linear association.Methods: In this study, we explore the dose-response relationship between built environmentcharacteristics and transport walking for youths in Hong Kong, a city with large variations inresidential density. Detailed transport walking behaviors, such as the number of trips andwalking duration, were extracted from the 2011 Hong Kong Travel Characteristics Survey(N = 13,287; aged 5–18). Neighborhood socioeconomic status, age, gender, household income,and household vehicle ownership were controlled in the generalized additive mixed models(GAMMs) of the built environment-transport walking associations.Results: We found inverted U-shaped associations between population density and both the oddsand total minutes of transport walking. Population density within 30,000–60,000 persons/km2 isoptimal to promote transport walking for youths. In addition, the number of recreational facilities and retail shops were positively associated with likelihood of engaging in transport walking,and number of bus stops was negatively associated with transport walking.Conclusion: We add new empirical evidence on the signi<U+FB01>cant and non-linear relationship between urban density and transport walking. Although increasing urban density in already denselydeveloped cities may not be an e<U+FB00>ective intervention strategy to increase transport walking inyouths, such strategy may still be e<U+FB00>ective in other less dense areas.
1. Introduction
    Being su<U+FB03>ciently physically active is important for youths (children and adolescents 5–18 years old), as it is associated with a
wide range of health bene<U+FB01>ts, such as reduced cardiovascular risk factors, enhanced bone mineral density, and improved physical and
psychological well-being (Janssen and Leblanc, 2010; Strong et al., 2005). The World Health Organization recommends that children
and adolescents should be physically active at a moderate or vigorous level for at least 60 min a day. However, more than 80% of the
world's adolescent population is insu<U+FB03>ciently physically active (World Health Organization, 2018). Consequently, stimulating
youths' physical activity is a crucial part of health strategies of many governments.
    Walking for transport purposes (i.e. transport walking) is a reliable source of overall physical activity: there is consistent evidence
that youths who walk or cycle to school or other destinations report signi<U+FB01>cantly higher levels of physical activity than those who
travel by motorized vehicles (Faulkner et al., 2009; Lubans et al., 2011; van Sluijs et al., 2009). Walking can o<U+FB00>er additional
environmental bene<U+FB01>ts, such as improved air quality and decreased tra<U+FB03>c congestion and carbon emissions if more people use
walking and cycling instead of cars (Nieuwenhuijsen, 2016; Xiao et al., 2017). Walking is the most common form of physical activity,
and it can be conveniently done alone or with others. Increasing brisk walking is one of the most reliable and feasible interventions to
help children and adolescents to achieve their recommended levels of physical activity (Carlin et al., 2016; Mitra, 2013; Saelens and
Handy, 2008). Transport walking has thus recently attracted huge attention from policymakers and researchers.
    Built environment is increasingly being recognized as an essential factor that can promote or hinder transport walking.
Understanding the built environment–transport walking associations is vital for children and adolescents who have fewer choices of
transportation mode and hence are more likely to be a<U+FB00>ected by the environment (D'Haese et al., 2015; Ding et al., 2011). Empirical
<U+FB01>ndings regarding built environment and transport walking reveal complex patterns, with inconsistent associations for some built
environment characteristics.
    There is strong evidence for positive associations between recreational facility accessibility and transport walking for youths. In a
neighborhood with nearby parks, recreational or sports facilities, and commercial stores, youths are likely to travel to these destinations by foot and tend to make more transport walking trips. Three reviews examining transport walking or cycling for children and
adolescents concurred that the provision of parks or other recreational facilities had positive e<U+FB00>ects on transport walking rates and
overall level of physical activity (Ding et al., 2011; J. Panter, Jones and van Sluijs, 2008; Pont et al., 2009). For example, in a survey
of 678 children (ages 6–12) in two American cities (Kurka et al., 2015), children living in areas with less access to recreational
facilities or parks reported 13 fewer minutes of accelerometer-measured moderate to vigorous physical activity per day (MVPA) than
those living in areas with higher access. Children who were aware of more sport and recreational facilities were more likely to walk to
school or to other destinations than those who were less aware (Evenson et al., 2006). Similar results were reported in a longitudinal
study in Hong Kong: adolescents’ MVPA levels were positively associated with perceived availability of sports facilities in neighborhoods after a 16-month follow-up (Wong et al., 2014). Alternatively, those <U+FB01>ndings might be interpreted that the youths become
aware of more facilities because walking to school increase their exposure to those facilities.
    There are mixed results about the association between land-use mix and transport walking for youths (D'Haese et al., 2015; Ding
et al., 2011; J. Panter et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009). Urban areas with higher levels of land use diversity may increase the proximity
to and accessibility of di<U+FB00>erent types of destinations and make transport walking more feasible. However, some studies have reported
insigni<U+FB01>cant associations between land-use mix and transport walking (Mitra et al., 2010; J. R. Panter, Jones, Van Sluijs and Gri<U+FB03>n,
2010; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008).
    Residential density is important for planning purposes because it is easy to measure from census and other data, and it is regulated
by many governments (Forsyth et al., 2007). Residential density may have direct e<U+FB00>ects on transport walking and indirect e<U+FB00>ects as a
proxy for other variables such as socioeconomic status (SES) (Forsyth et al., 2007). It has been suggested that areas with higher
residential density have more destinations such as shops, services, and public transport stops nearby and that they therefore promote
transport walking (Forsyth et al., 2007; C. Lee and Moudon, 2006). Some have argued that density is a proxy variable for other
dimensions such as low-income populations, land-use mix, and transit use (Cervero and Kockelman, 1997; Handy et al., 2002; C. Lee
and Moudon, 2004).
    However, <U+FB01>ndings on the associations between residential density and transport walking or overall physical activity for youths
remain largely inconclusive. Reviews based on studies conducted in low density cities, especially the United States and Australia,
found mostly positive associations between residential density and transport walking (Ding et al., 2011; J. Panter et al., 2008; Pont
et al., 2009). A recent study conducted in Nanjing, a high-density city in China, reported that residential density was negatively
associated with self-reported recreational physical activity time for 2375 high school students (Xu et al., 2010). Another study found
that children living in rural neighborhoods engaged in more physical activity than those living in urban neighborhoods (Sandercock
et al., 2010). However, these two studies focused on the outcomes of overall physical activity rather than transport walking, and the
two may have di<U+FB00>erent associations with built environment factors (Ding et al., 2011; Saelens and Handy, 2008).
    Furthermore, social environment and safety are other factors a<U+FB00>ecting youth's transport walking. Children who reported higher
perceived safety were more likely to use alternate routes to and from school, which suggests that perceived safety of the environment
may encourage children to actively explore their environment (Sun et al., 2018a,b). General safety and tra<U+FB03>c safety were associated
with transport working in North America and Australia, but not in Europe (D'Haese et al., 2015). This might be due to the increased
dangers of walking and cycling to school in the US and Australia, because of substantial urban sprawl (Rothman et al., 2015).
Children who walked or cycled to school also tended to explore spaces when they traveled independently (Sun et al., 2018a,b).
Studies on independent mobility suggested that children who had the freedom to play outdoors and traveled actively without adult
supervision accumulated more physical activity than others (Schoeppe et al., 2013).
Fig. 1. There are great variations in urban density in Hong Kong. Up: Four quartiles of population density of administrative unit—Tertiary Planning
Units (TPUs) in Hong Kong. Below: Examples of low—quartile 1 (a), medium-low—quartile 2 (b), medium-high—quartile 3 (c), and high—quartile
4 (d) density developments in Hong Kong. Source: Google Inc.
    A major challenge to determining built environment–transport walking associations is the limited variation in built environment
factors, especially urban density. Most transport walking studies focusing on youths have been conducted in North America,
Australia, and Europe, all of which feature relatively low urban density compared with some cities in Asia. The lack of adequate
variation in urban density prevents these <U+FB01>ndings from being generalized to densely developed cities. Hong Kong, for example, has a
gross population density of 6000 persons/km2. The population density in built-up areas is four times as high as gross density, because
more than 75% of the land has been preserved as country parks or other natural areas. Hong Kong thus has considerable variation in
urban density, ranging from areas with single-family houses to those with clusters of high-rises (Fig. 1). The quartile cut-o<U+FB00> points
(930, 8650, 35744 persons/km2) for population density of administrative units in Hong Kong—Tertiary Planning Units (TPUs)—also
supported great variation.
    There is another caveat in the literature. Most empirical studies have used various linear models to estimate the built environment–physical activity associations. Recent studies have called for the estimation of complex dose-response relationships to
identify the minimum, maximum, and optimal doses of built environment variables for promoting physical activity (Cerin et al.,
2018; Christiansen et al., 2016; Kerr et al., 2016). One international study compared 12,181 adults in 10 countries and found a
signi<U+FB01>cant non-linear relationship between resident density and transport walking for adults (Christiansen et al., 2016). The authors
of that study found that the relationship had an inverted U-shape with a threshold of 12,000 dwellings/km2 for the maximum
likelihood of transport walking. A further increase in residential density was associated with a decreased likelihood of transport
walking. However, the dose-response relationship between the built environment and physical activity for youths is still unknown.
    To address these research gaps, in this study we explore the dose-response relationship between the built environment and
transport walking using a large sample of youths in Hong Kong.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants and walking data
    Hong Kong is in the southeast coastal area of China. It has a total population of 7.3 million people and a land area of 1104 km2,
making it one of most densely populated cities in the world.
    The walking data were obtained from the 2011 Hong Kong Travel Characteristics Survey (TCS). TCS was conducted by Transport
Department to determine the overall travel behaviors in Hong Kong. TCS used a random sampling method to select participating
households from a list of permanent dwelling addresses maintained by the Census & Statistics Department. The survey included a
total of 101,385 participants of 35,401 households. The survey response rate was 71%. The present study comprised a geocoded
sample of 13,287 youths between the ages of 5 and 18 randomly distributed throughout Hong Kong. The general trip information for
a 24-h period for the participants was collected via face-to-face interviews. The participants needed to report in chronological order
the places they have visited during the reference 24-h period as well as detailed transport modes, address of trip origin and destination, departure time and arrival time for all trips. Residence location, household income, household vehicle ownership and individual information (e.g. age, and sex, whether a full-time student) were also collected during the interviews.
    Personal, household, trip data were combined via unique household and household member IDs. The total walking time in mins of
a youth participant was calculated by summing up all walk components from trip data. Ethical approval for this study was granted by
the Research Committee of City University of Hong Kong (H000691).
2.2. Environmental variables
    Each participant's dwelling address was geocoded with ArcGIS 10.5 (Esri, U.S.A.). Two street network bu<U+FB00>ers (500 m and 1 km)
were created around a dwelling location, consistent with a dose-response study for adults (Christiansen et al., 2016). Some potential
walking-in<U+FB02>uencing built environment factors within the bu<U+FB00>ers were objectively calculated in GIS because of their relevance to
walking behaviors and data availability: population density (Li et al., 2005); street connectivity (Adkins et al., 2012; Chin et al., 2008;
Li et al., 2005); land-use mix; number of bus stops (Yang et al., 2019a), retail shops and recreational facilities; and distance to the
closest Mass Transit Rail (MTR) station (Hajna et al., 2015; I. M. Lee et al., 2012). All built environment data were obtained from the
Lands Department and Census & Statistics Department of Hong Kong.
    Population density was de<U+FB01>ned as the residential population per unit of land area in Tertiary Planning Units (TPUs) in Hong Kong.
Street connectivity was assessed by street intersection density, de<U+FB01>ned as the number of intersections (three or more streets) per unit
of land area in bu<U+FB00>ers.
    Land-use mix entropy score was calculated using the entropy score to measure the level of diversity of land use types. We
measured destination or service diversity from number of residents and jobs in di<U+FB00>erent categories; those data were maintained by
Census & Statistics Department. It is di<U+FB00>erent from previous land-use mix measures with land use categories (e.g. residential,
commercial, or industrial levels) at the parcel level (Frank et al., 2005). The abstract land use at the parcel level is unable to capture
the variations in high-density environments with intense and dominant mixed-use developments. The number of residents and the
jobs belonging to di<U+FB00>erent sectors (retail, accommodation, and all other jobs) were used to calculate the entropy score as a proxy for
land-use mix in TPUs.
2.3. Covariates
    The survey also collected some personal-level data, which were used as covariates in this study: age, gender, household income,
and household vehicle ownership. The monthly household income data were originally coded into 16 bands but were converted to 4
bands (< HKD10,000, HKD10,000–20,000, HKD20,000–30,000, and > HKD30,000). Age was converted to a 4-band variable (5–8,
9–11, 12–14, and 15–18 years).
    The median household income (in HKD/month) in a participant's administrative planning unit (TPU) were used to assess
neighborhood-level SES.
2.4. Data analysis
    Descriptive statistics for the two walking outcome variables, namely any walking and total minutes of walking during the 24-h
reference period, were computed for the whole group and the subgroups, respectively. The associations of built environment variables with walking outcomes were estimated using generalized additive mixed models (GAMMs) (Wood, 2017). GAMMs have been
used in emerging public health studies (Cerin et al., 2018; Christiansen et al., 2016; Kerr et al., 2016). It can explain the clustering
pattern of the walking behaviors for participants from the same administrative planning unit. Random intercepts were speci<U+FB01>ed to
account for within-administrative-unit clustering e<U+FB00>ects. More importantly, GAMMs can estimate complex dose-response
relationships. The shape of the relationship was estimated with thin-plate splines. The criterion for the determination of a linear or
non-linear relationship was whether the change in the Akaike information criterion (AIC) value was greater than 10.
    A two-step data analysis was conducted for the walking variables: 1) GAMMs with binomial variance and a logit link function
were used to model the likelihood of walking (versus not walking) for the 13,287 youths who responded to the main survey. The odds
ratios of walking and 95% con<U+FB01>dence intervals (CIs) were reported in the model. 2) GAMMs with negative binomial variance and
logarithmic link function were used to model the total walking time for the subset of 6019 participants who walked at least once
during the reference 24-h period. The regression coe<U+FB03>cient ß and 95% CIs estimated proportional increases in minutes of walking
associated with changes in the environment variables.
    The GAMM analysis was conducted in R with the “mgcv” package (Wood, 2017). Before implementing the GAMMs, Variance
In<U+FB02>ation Factors (VIFs) were checked with the “usdm” package (Naimi et al., 2014), and all of the built environment variables with
VIF = 2 were removed to ensure no multicollinearity.
3. Results
3.1. Descriptive results
    Table 1 describes the demographic and walking behaviors characteristics of a total number of 13,287 youths aged 5–18 years from
the TCS. Overall, 45.3% of youths engaged in walking at least once during the 24-h period. Adolescents (12–14 and 15–18 years)
were less likely to engage in walking than children (5–8 and 9–11 years). Male participants slightly outnumbered female participants
and were slightly more likely to walk than females (45.9% vs 44.7%). Participants with high household income (> HKD50,000/
month) were less likely to engage in walking than participants with lower income. Overall, 19.5% of participants living in households
with private vehicles, and they were less likely to walk than those living in households without vehicles (34.1% vs 48%).
    Table 2 describes the demographic and walking behaviors characteristics of 6019 youths walking at least once during the 24-h
period. On average, the participants walked for 18.5 min (SD = 12.2). The adolescents (12–14 and 15–18 years) walked longer than
children (5–8 and 9–11 years). There were slightly more male participants than female (51.4% vs 48.6%); male and female participants had similar walking time (18.6 vs 18.4 min). The participants with high household income (> HKD50,000) walked for shorter
durations than other income groups. Youths living in households with vehicles also walked for shorter durations than those living in
households without vehicles (15.3 vs 19.5 min).
3.2. Analysis 1: e<U+FB00>ects on odds of walking
    In the <U+FB01>rst step analysis, the GAMM models were used to predict the likelihood of engaging in any walking for 13,287 youths.
Street intersection density was removed from the GAMM models because it had a VIF > 2.
    There are signi<U+FB01>cant but non-linear associations between population density and the likelihood of walking in both 500-m and 1-km bu<U+FB00>ers (Fig. 2). The associations have a reverse U-shape that is positive up to a population density of 30,000 persons/km2; it then
becomes negative for higher population densities. The number of recreational facilities and the number of retail shops were positively
and linearly associated with the odds of walking in both bu<U+FB00>ers, while land-use mix and distance to an MTR station were not
signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with this outcome (see Table 3). The number of bus stops was not associated with the likelihood of walking in
the 500 m bu<U+FB00>er, but it shows a negative association in the 1 km bu<U+FB00>er.
    Regarding the covariates, age, household income, and vehicle ownership were negatively associated with the likelihood of
walking. Older children (9–11 years) and adolescents (12–14, 15–18 years) had lower likelihoods of walking compared with younger
children (5–8 years). Youth from the highest income group (> HKD50, 000/month) had a lower likelihood of walking compared with
those from the lowest income group (< HKD10, 000/month). Youth with a vehicle in their household had lower odds than those
without. Male and female participants had no signi<U+FB01>cant di<U+FB00>erence in their likelihood of walking.
3.3. Analysis 2: e<U+FB00>ects on total walking time
    In the second step analysis, the GAMM models were used to predict total minutes of walking for those who walked at least once
during 24-h period (N = 6019). Street intersection density was removed from the GAMM models because it had a VIF > 2.
    Similar to the results of analysis 1, the association between population density and total walking time is signi<U+FB01>cant but non-linear
in both 500-m and 1-km bu<U+FB00>ers (Fig. 3). The associations have a reverse U-shape that is positive up to a population density of 60,000
persons/km2, it then becomes negative for higher population densities. The number of retail shops was positively and linearly
associated with total walking time in both bu<U+FB00>ers (see Table 4). The number of bus stops was negatively associated with total walking
time. Land-use mix, the number of recreational facilities, distance to MTR were not signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with total walking time.
    Medium household income in neighborhood was negatively associated with total walking time. Compared with the age group of
5–8 years, the other three age groups walked for a signi<U+FB01>cantly longer duration. There is no signi<U+FB01>cant di<U+FB00>erence for male and female
participants, or participants of di<U+FB00>erent household income groups. Youth with a vehicle in their household walked signi<U+FB01>cantly
shorter duration than those without.
4. Discussion
    In this study, we investigated the dose-response relationship between built environment characteristics and transport walking in a
high-density city. We found signi<U+FB01>cant but non-linear associations between population density and the odds and total minutes of
transport walking. In addition, land-use mix was not associated with transport walking. The number of recreational facilities and
retail shops was positively associated with the odds of engaging in transport walking; the latter was also positively associated with
total minutes of walking. The number of bus stops was negatively associated with either the odds or total minutes of transport
walking.
    The travel characteristic data showed that 45.3% of youths engaged in walking at least once during the 24-h period. The walking
rate is lower than that in a recent study in Hong Kong, which found 58% of its 1299 adolescents reported a weekly engagement in
active commuting to school (Barnett et al., 2019). The measuring time scales (daily versus weekly) and behavior outcomes (walking
versus active commuting) limit a further meaning comparison. Nevertheless, our results may have a higher degree of generalizability
for the whole youth population in Hong Kong than those in the previous study, because this study have a larger sample size. The
proportion of youths engaging in walking in Hong Kong is lower than that in Finland (Kallio et al., 2016), but are much higher than
that in Canada (Gray et al., 2014) and in UK (Townsend et al., 2015).
4.1. Urban density
    Urban density is a key planning parameter that heavily in<U+FB02>uences urban form and social and economic activities in cities. In this
study, we revealed an inverted U-shaped dose-response e<U+FB00>ect between population density and odds of transport walking for 13,287
youths in 500 m and 1 km bu<U+FB00>ers after adjusting for other built environment factors. The population density was positively associated
with the odds of transport walking up to a threshold of approximately 30,000 persons/km2, after which the association became <U+FB02>at
and then negative. Similarly, for 6019 youths walking at least once during 24-h period, the population density was positively
associated with total minutes of transport walk up to a threshold of approximately 60,000 persons/km2, after which the association
rapidly became negative. The <U+FB01>nding demonstrates the complex relationship between population density and transport walking. Our
<U+FB01>ndings contrast with those in three reviews (Ding et al., 2011; J. Panter et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009), which found a positive
relationship between urban density and transport walking for youths. These three reviews mainly summarized <U+FB01>ndings from low
density developed cities. In one empirical study, for example, children living in the neighborhoods in the top density tertile were
three times more likely to walk or cycle compared to those living in lower density neighborhoods (Kerr et al., 2006). It is worth noting
that in these study areas, the variation in population density was often limited, and the threshold level (30,000–60,000 persons/m2)
was typically not reached. Our <U+FB01>nding that the negative association between urban density and transport walking time is in line with
a study conducted in Nanjing, another densely developed city in China (Xu et al., 2010). Xu and his colleagues found that high school
students living in areas in the higher tertile of residential density engaged in less recreational physical activity than those in areas in
the lower tertile. One possible explanation is that both Hong Kong and Nanjing have great variation in urban density, although the
two studies measured di<U+FB00>erent domains of physical activity (transport walking vs recreational physical activity).
    The inverted U-shaped dose-e<U+FB00>ect relationship between urban density and transport walking behaviors for youths identi<U+FB01>ed in
this study, is similar to a study for adults (Christiansen et al., 2016). However, for adults, dwelling density was positively associated
with the likelihood of transport walking for adults up to 12,000 dwellings/km2, beyond which further increases in dwelling density
had little or negative in<U+FB02>uence (Christiansen et al., 2016). The threshold levels of urban density to increase the likelihood of transport
walking for youths (30,000 persons/km2, or 10,700 dwellings/km2 given average household size of 2.8 in Hong Kong) and for adults
Fig. 4. The gross population density of administrative planning units—Tertiary Planning Units (TPUs) in Hong Kong. 84 out of 289 TPUs (or 29.0%)
have a population density exceeding 30,000 persons/km2 and 38 TPUs (13.1%) have one exceeding 60,000 persons/km2. The extreme high-density
developments in those areas may hinder youths' transport walking.
(12,000 dwellings/km2) were close to each other. In addition, the present study provides new evidence of population density
threshold of approximately 60,000 persons/km2 to increase total minutes of walking for youths. Further studies are needed to <U+FB01>nd
out whether these <U+FB01>ndings are sheer coincidence or generalizable. If the latter is true, our <U+FB01>ndings, together with others, should have
signi<U+FB01>cant planning implications. The threshold of approximately 30,000–60,000 persons/km2 may become the maximum urban
density level for urban development for the promotion of transport walking. Given that many urban areas in Hong Kong (Fig. 4) have
exceeded this threshold, any future urban redevelopment may consider reducing urban density.
4.2. Land-use mix
    In this study, we found that land-use mix was not associated with the likelihood of either transport walking or total transport
walking time. This result contrasts with those in previous reviews (D'Haese et al., 2015; Ding et al., 2011; J. Panter et al., 2008; Pont
et al., 2009) but is in line with previously reported insigni<U+FB01>cant associations for children (Mitra et al., 2010; J. R. Panter et al., 2010;
Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008) and adults in Hong Kong (Lu et al., 2017). The mixed results may derive from how land-use mix
was measured. In the current study, we measured land-use mix with number of residents and jobs, rather than land use types (Frank
et al., 2005). In densely developed cities, land use mixture in parcel level cannot capture the level of mix of di<U+FB00>erent destinations and
functions because most buildings have mixed uses, such as having retail shops on ground level and residential <U+FB02>ats on upper levels.
Some researchers have proposed to use jobs or points of interest to measure land-use mix for high-density cities (Lu et al., 2017; Sun
et al., 2018a,b; Yang et al., 2019b; Wang et al., 2019). Future methodological development in assessing land-use mix, especially in
high-density cities, is warranted to identify the optimal level of land-use mix to promote transport walking.
4.3. Accessibility of facilities
    We also found that the number of recreational facilities in the bu<U+FB00>ers was positively associated with the likelihood of engagement
in transport walking. The number of retail shops was positively associated with both the odds and total minutes of transport walking.
The result concurs with previous reviews (D'Haese et al., 2015; Ding et al., 2011; J. Panter et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009). Parks,
sports and recreational facilities, and retail shops in neighborhoods are common destinations that are typically within walking
distance. The accessibility of facilities makes transport walking feasible. The positive associations are relatively robust because they
were reported in many studies across di<U+FB00>erent locations. It is worth noting that the number of bus stop was negatively associated with
transport walking in this study. More bus stops probably indicate heavier tra<U+FB03>c <U+FB02>ow, which may lead to concerns about tra<U+FB03>c safety
and reduce the likelihood of transport walking.
4.4. Strengths and limitations
    This current study used a large sample size at the population level; hence, our results can be safely generalized to all youths in
Hong Kong. The large variation in urban density in Hong Kong, in conjunction with the use of advanced statistic models, enables us to
detect complex dose-response associations between built environment variables and transport walking. This study provides evidence
that can be used to develop targeted interventions and planning policy for Hong Kong and for other densely populated urban areas in
Asia, which are understudied in the public health literature. The tentative threshold level of population density (approximately
30,000 persons/km2) for youths is close to that for adults (Christiansen et al., 2016); hence, the threshold level may be incorporated
into international strategies to improve transport walking and public health upon veri<U+FB01>cation by future studies.
    This study has several limitations. This cross-sectional research design may prevent the identi<U+FB01>cation of any causal relationship
between built environment characteristics and transport walking. Future studies could use a quasi-experimental design, such as
comparing behavioral changes before and after an environmental intervention (Carver et al., 2014; Hearst et al., 2012) or residential
relocation (Boone-Heinonen et al., 2011; Mokhtarian and Cao, 2008), or comparing behaviors in large-scale public housing schemes
in which residential relocation is largely determined by government agency rather than self-selection (Lu, 2018; Lu et al., 2018).
Although the built environment was objectively measured in this study, transport walking behaviors were self-reported and thus
subject to recall bias. To address this issue, walking data can be objectively assessed by accelerometers. It would be worth to explore
the built environment-walking associations during school days and non-school days separately. However, we cannot conduct separate
analyses due to limited information in the dataset. Lastly, this study was conducted in a single city, the ultra-high population density
may in<U+FB02>uence the generalizability of the <U+FB01>ndings, and evidence from other high-density cities are needed to verify the robustness of
our results.
5. Conclusion
    Based on transport walking data from 13,287 youths aged 5–18 years old in Hong Kong, a high-density city but still with great
variations in population density, the current study highlights the importance of accessibility to recreational facilities, such as parks,
sports facilities and retail shops. More importantly, this study underscores the threshold e<U+FB00>ect of urban density on youths' likelihood
of engaging in transport walking. Population density above 30,000–60,000 persons/km2 has little or even negative e<U+FB00>ects on
transport walking. Our <U+FB01>ndings suggest that neighborhoods with appropriate population density and easy access to pedestrian
destinations have a positive e<U+FB00>ect on youths’ transport walking, which is an important component of overall physical activity. In
addition, although increasing density in high-density cities may not be an e<U+FB00>ective intervention strategy to increase transport walking
for youths, such strategy may still be e<U+FB00>ective in other less dense areas.