Differences in parental perceptions of walking and cycling to
high school according to distance
abstract
Background: Parental perceptions towards different modes of transport correlate with adolescents’ mode choice for school trips. Whether parental attitudes differ for walking versuscycling and/or home-to-school distance is unknown. We compared parental perceptions of
walking versus cycling to school in adolescents in Dunedin, New Zealand and examined
whether mode-specific barriers differ by distance to school.
Methods: Parents (n = 341; age: 47.5 ± 5.2 years; 77.1% females) completed a survey about
their adolescent’s (age: 13–18 years; 48.1% boys) school travel and their own perceptions
of walking/cycling to school. Participants were categorised into three groups according to
distance to school as ‘walkable’ (2.25 km), ‘cyclable’ (>2.25–4.0 km) and ‘beyond cyclable’
(>4.0 km).
Results: Common modes of transport to school differed significantly across the
‘walkable’/’cyclable’/’beyond cyclable’ categories (car passenger: 25.7%/40.5%/60.6%; public/school bus: 5.5%/15.4%/28.4%; walking: 66.2%/28.2%/1.2%; cycling: 0.0%/7.7%/0.5%; all
p < 0.001). Compared to walking, parents perceived cycling to school to be less important
(walking/cycling: 87.5%/62.5%), with less social support from parents (46.2%/17.1%), peers
(20.6%/4.8%) and school (24.5%/12.4%), less interest from adolescents (48.5%/31.9%), fewer
cycle paths (26.5%) versus footpaths (65.0%) and more safety concerns (35.0%/64.6%; allp < 0.001). As distance to school increased, parents’ social support decreased whereas personal, environmental and safety-related barriers increased for both modes, with less consistent findings for cycling. Overall, 68.2% of parents expected to participate in adolescents’walking/cycling to school decision-making.Conclusions: Parents favoured walking compared to cycling to school with parental attitudesfor both modes changing with increasing distance to school. The findings illustrate theimportance of addressing parental concerns, considering the specificity of walking andcycling and taking into account distance to school in active transport to school initiatives.
                                                      
1. Introduction
    Regular physical activity is associated with a range of health, environmental, social and economic benefits (Poitras et al.,
2016; World Health Organization, 2018). However, declining levels of physical activity among adolescents have been
reported worldwide (Aubert et al., 2018; Guthold, Stevens, Riley, & Bull, 2019), including in New Zealand (Smith et al.,
2018). If feasible, active transport to school (ATS) is a convenient way to integrate physical activity into the everyday lives
of children and adolescents (Rainham et al., 2012). These practices can maintain or increase physical activity levels (Faulkner,
Buliung, Flora, & Fusco, 2009; Kek, García Bengoechea, Spence, & Mandic, 2019; Mendoza et al., 2011; Pabayo et al., 2012),
thereby reducing the risk of excess weight and early onset of non-communicable diseases (e.g., type 2 diabetes, cardiovas-
cular disease) (Abrignani et al., 2019; Bjerregaard et al., 2018). They may also develop into environmentally sustainable travel practices over a lifetime (Simons et al., 2017), for instance with the adoption of norms that are favourable toward active
transport modes. Yet, although rates vary considerably between and within countries (Aubert et al., 2018; Uddin et al., 2020),
the prevalence of ATS in adolescents has been consistently declining over recent decades (McDonald, 2007; Ministry of
Transport, 2015). In New Zealand approximately 40% of children and adolescents currently use ATS (Smith et al., 2018, 2019).
    A complex set of individual, social, environmental and policy factors correlate with practices of walking and cycling to
school among adolescents (13–18 years of age) (Davison, Werder, & Lawson, 2008; Ducheyne, De Bourdeaudhuij,
Spittaels, & Cardon, 2012; Panter, Jones, & van Sluijs, 2008; Pont, Ziviani, Wadley, Bennett, & Abbott, 2009; Wong,
Faulkner, & Buliung, 2011). For example, higher rates of ATS have been reported among older adolescents, boys and those
living closer to school compared to their counterparts. Beyond these, characteristics of the school route (Panter, Jones,
Van Sluijs, & Griffin, 2010) and features of the built environment around home (Kerr et al., 2006; Larsen et al., 2009;
Panter et al., 2010; Timperio et al., 2006) and school neighbourhoods (Pocock, Moore, Keall, & Mandic, 2019) also influence
ATS rates in adolescents. Moreover, social factors, including peer, parental and school support are important in encouraging
walking and cycling to school in this age group (Carver et al., 2005; Ducheyne et al., 2012; Emond & Handy, 2012; Esteban-
Cornejo et al., 2016; Frater et al., 2017). Research has shown that parental attitudes towards different modes of transport
(e.g. walking, cycling, driving, busing) correlate with adolescents’ mode choice for school trips (Woldeamanuel, 2016). For
example, parental safety concerns about ATS-related traffic and personal safety are negatively associated with ATS among
adolescents (Carver et al., 2005; Carver, 2010; Hume et al., 2009). In addition, parental perceptions of the built environment
(e.g., street connectivity) are associated with ATS among adolescents (Aranda-Balboa, Huertas-Delgado, Herrador-
Colmenero, Cardon, & Chillon, 2019).
    In addition, the travel modes used by different household members (parents/caregivers, siblings, other relatives or non-relatives), along with norms and encouragements, can influence the adoption of active or motorised modes (Baslington,
2008). For instance, parents may drive adolescents to school on their way to work (Keall et al., in review), and thus the decisions of how adolescents get to school are part of a complex array of family practices, with movement intrinsic to family
practice (Holdsworth, 2013). The dominance of car-based transport in most countries around the world means that
motorised private car-transport is associated with normality, while active modes are characterised as deviant
(Manderschield, 2014).
    Previous studies have examined parental perceptions of adolescents’ walking and cycling to/from school either individually (Ducheyne et al., 2012; Emond & Handy, 2012; Hopkins & Mandic, 2017) or considered walking and cycling together
under the umbrella term of ‘active transport’ (Aibar, Mandic, Generelo Lanaspa, Gallardo, & Zaragoza, 2018; Huertas-Delgado
et al., 2017; Hume et al., 2009). Though some parental concerns such as the distance between home and school, hills, and
personal safety may be similar for both modes, other concerns such as traffic-related safety are greater for cycling than
for walking to school (Hopkins & Mandic, 2017; Mandic et al., 2017). For instance, a recent New Zealand study reported
greater use of walking, more positive adolescents’ perceptions of walking, and better social and infrastructure support for
walking versus for cycling to school (Mandic et al., 2017). However, mode-specific motivations and barriers to ATS have
yet to be examined from the parental perspective (Mandic et al., 2017).
    Home-to-school distance is the strongest predictor of ATS in adolescents (Ikeda et al., 2018; Mandic et al., 2015;
McDonald, 2007). Although most previous ATS research controlled for distance to school in the multivariate analyses, few
studies have analysed adolescents’ perceptions of walking and/or cycling to school by limiting the study sample to those
adolescents who lived within reasonable walking and/or cycling distance to school (Mandic et al., 2017; Pocock et al.,
2019). Moreover, the definition of reasonable distances for these modes varies between countries, ranging from 1.4 km to
3.0 km for walking (Bere, van der Horst, Oenema, Prins, & Brug, 2008; Chillón, Panter, Corder, Jones, & Van Sluijs, 2015;
Nelson, Foley, O’Gorman, Moyna, & Woods, 2008; Pocock et al., 2019) and from 3.0 km to 8.0 km for cycling to school
(Bere et al., 2008; D’Haese, De Meester, De Bourdeaudhuij, Deforche, & Cardon, 2011; Nelson et al., 2008; Van Dyck, De
Bourdeaudhuij, Cardon, & Deforche, 2010). No studies to date have examined whether adolescents’ and their parents’ perceptions of walking and cycling to school differed based on whether they lived within walking and/or cycling distance to
school or not. Therefore, the purpose of this study is two-fold: a) to compare parental perceptions of walking versus cycling
to school in an urban setting; and, b) to examine if those parental perceptions of motivations for, and barriers to, walking and
cycling to school differ based on distance between adolescents’ home and their school.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Setting
    New Zealand is a long and narrow country, with varied topography across two main islands, the North Island and the
South Island. Climate is predominantly temperate maritime (Köppen classification), but with distinct variability in conditions across the regions, ranging from subtropical in the far north to conditions influenced by a closer proximity to Antarctica
in the far south. Dunedin is situated in Otago, on the lower east coast of the South Island, with a population of over 120,000
and a central built-up area extending about 8 km from north to south and 7 km from east to west. The city has highly varied
topographical features, including steep residential roads, a largely flat urban centre, and a long peninsula. This topography,
relatively small population and land area (3,314.8 km2) results in low-density neighbourhoods, with physical and built environment features creating and sustaining separation of suburbs and satellite towns including Mosgiel. State Highway 1,
which runs the length of the country, cuts through the centre of Dunedin as the main route for intercity road transport, leadingto high volumes and a diversity of vehicle types through the city; including a high percentage of heavy vehicles. In recent
years, Dunedin has had a series of new walking and cycling infrastructures developed, which have sought to connect residential areas with schools, sporting areas and other central sites.
2.2. Participants
    Parent participants were recruited as part of the Built Environment and Active Transport to School (BEATS) Study in
Dunedin, New Zealand, in 2014–2017 (Mandic et al., 2015, 2016). Recruitment was conducted through schools, workplaces,
social media and at sport events for adolescents, as described elsewhere (Mandic et al., 2016, 2018). Parents were able to
participate in this study irrespective of whether their son or daughter participated in the BEATS Student Survey. Parent participants signed consent either online or on paper. Those who completed the survey entered into a draw for an iPad or one of
three NZD$250 (~USD$180) grocery or petrol vouchers. The study was approved by the University of Otago Human Ethics
Committee (reference number: 13/203).
2.3. Questionnaire
    Parents completed a 20- to 25-minute questionnaire either online (n = 267) or on paper (n = 74), as described previously
(Mandic et al., 2016, 2018). Questions related to demographic characteristics of participants and their adolescents, participant perceptions of walking and cycling to school, and their adolescents’ travel to school behaviour.
    Parents reported their age, gender, ethnicity, marital status, employment status, education level and household-related
items (home address, the number of children, vehicles and bicycles at home). The home address was attributed a New Zealand index of deprivation value (a measure of neighbourhood socioeconomic status, with 1 = least deprived to 10 = most
deprived). This was achieved by geocoding the address (converting to coordinates) and spatially joining that point with
the co-located census meshblock containing the deprivation score (which is how the scores are published by the New Zealand Index of Deprivation Study (Salmond, Crampton, & Atkinson, 2007)). Parents also reported age and gender of their eldest
child enrolled in a secondary school.
    The geocoded home address was also used to calculate distance from home to adolescents’ school based on the shortest
path on a connected street network using Geographic Information System (GIS) network analysis (Mandic et al., 2016). A
distance of  2.25 km was used as a reasonable distance for walking to school (Pocock et al., 2019) and  4.0 km as a reasonable cycling distance for adolescents (Nelson et al., 2008). Parent participants were grouped into three categories based
on distance to school: ‘within walking distance’ (2.25 km), ‘within cycling distance’ (>2.25 km and  4.0 km), and ‘beyond
cycling distance’ (>4.0 km).
    As described previously, parents reported adolescents’ travel to school habits using the question ‘‘How does your child usually travel to school?” for different transport modes, with response categories ‘never’, ‘rarely’, ‘sometimes’, ‘most of the time’
and ‘all of the time’ (Mandic et al., 2017). In our sample, each participant reported on their adolescent using at least one of
the modes ‘most of the time’ and/or ‘all of the time’, which was used as a basis for classifying adolescents into active transport, motorized transport or combined active and motorized transport users (Mandic et al., 2017).
    Perceptions of walking and cycling to school were assessed with a parental version of the items used in the BEATS Study
Student Survey (see supplement) (Mandic et al., 2015, 2016, 2017). Briefly, most items assessed parental attitudes towards
walking and cycling to school separately, and included ATS-related decision making, parental perceptions of value of active
transport, encouragement, personal barriers (e.g., time constraints, preferences, convenience), environmental barriers
(distance, lack of footpaths/cycle paths) and safety perceptions of each mode. Finally, parents reported their perceptions
of their adolescents’ cycle skills and beliefs about cycling in general. Most items were assessed using a 4-point Likert scale
ranging from ‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly disagree’. An item about adolescents’ ability to cycle to school was assessed using a
7-point Likert scale anchored in ‘incapable (not able to)’ and ‘capable (able to)’.
2.4. Data analysis
    Categorical variables were compared using v2-test. The 4-point or 7-point Likert scale data were analysed as continuous
variables with paired t-tests to compare parental perceptions of walking versus cycling to school. One-way ANOVA with Scheffe post-hoc multiple comparisons or, when the assumption of homogeneity of variance was violated, Tamahane’s T2 test
for comparisons across three distance to school categories was used. Comparison across two distance to school categories
were conducted using independent t-test or Mann-Whitney U test when the assumption of homogeneity of variance was
not met. Findings reported in the tables include proportion of parent participants agreeing with each statement. Specifically,
all 4-point Likert scale items were recoded into ‘disagree’ and ‘agree’ and a 7-point Likert scale item was recoded as a 3-category item (e.g., ‘incapable’, ‘neutral’ and ‘capable’). Data analysis was performed using SPSS Statistical Package (Version
24). To account for multiple tests, a p-value of < 0.001 was chosen to indicate statistical significance for all statistical tests,
including post-hoc comparisons.
3. Results
    A total of 365 parents of adolescents from all 12 Dunedin secondary schools completed the survey. Where two parents
from the same address responded, data from mothers (n = 8) were removed from the sample. In addition, participants
who lacked distance to school data (n = 13) or relevant survey data (n = 1) or had an adolescent boarding at school or privately (n = 2) were excluded. Therefore, 341 parents were included in the analysis.
    Participants were mostly married females with half having university education, working full time and living in families
with two or more children (Table 1), with similar sociodemographic characteristics between participants who completed the
online versus paper survey (data not presented). The sociodemographic characteristics of parents were similar across distance to school categories (‘walkable’, ‘cyclable’, or ‘beyond cycling’) with the exception of neighbourhood level socioeconomic status. Specifically, families from the least deprived neighbourhoods were more likely to live beyond walking
distance to school.
    On average, the children of participants were 15.1 ± 1.6 years of age, and evenly split by gender (Table 2). Approximately
three-quarters of parents lived in households with two or more vehicles and nearly two-thirds had at least one bicycle that
their adolescent could use to cycle to school. In the total sample, over two-thirds of adolescents used motorised transport
only to travel to school, less than one-quarter used ATS only and less than one in 10 used mixed modes. Adolescents’ sociodemographic characteristics, driving licence status, as well as the availability of cars and bicycles in a household were similar
across the three distance to school groups, except the proportion of households with two or more cars significantly increased
with increasing distance to school (Table 2). However, modes of transport to school differed significantly across the three
groups with increasing rates of adolescents being driven or travelling to school by bus and decreasing rates of walking to
school as the distance to school increased.
    Most parents agreed that both walking and cycling to work are important (Table 3). The personal barriers associated with
ATS and convenience of driving adolescents to school as part of trip-chaining practice increased from ‘walking’ to ‘cycling’
and ‘beyond cycling’ distance to school categories. Most statistically significant differences were between ‘walking distance’
versus ‘beyond cycling distance’ to school. Although the proportion of parents who believed that adolescents’ participation in
decision-making about walking and/or cycling to school varied across the three distance to school categories, approximately
two-thirds of parents believed that they should be involved in making such decisions (Table 3).
    Compared to perceptions of walking to school, parents perceived cycling to school to be less important, with less social
support, more personal and environmental barriers and more safety concerns (Table 3). Comparisons across the three distance to school groups showed that the parental perceptions of social support for walking to school decreased whereas per-
ceived personal, environmental and safety-related barriers increased with the increasing distance to school (Table 3). Most of
the statistically significant differences were observed between ‘within walking distance’ and ‘beyond cycling distance’ categories, although clear patterns were apparent between walkable and beyond walkable distance to school (Table 3).
    Similar findings were also observed for parental perceptions of cycling to school but with less consistency in statistical
significance of differences across the three groups (Table 3). For cycling, parental perceptions of time constraints, the distance to school being too far for cycling, and cycling-related safety concerns were the only variables that showed statistically
significant differences across the three groups as the distance from home to school increased as well as between those living
within versus beyond cycling distance (Table 3).
    Overall, six in 10 parents perceived that their adolescent was capable of cycling to school and over half perceived their
adolescents’ cycling skills to be ‘very good’ or ‘excellent’ compared to their peers (Table 4). On the other hand, two in 10 parents perceived their adolescent as incapable of cycling to school and one in 10 parents rated their adolescents’ cycling skills
as ‘fair’ or ‘not good’ (Table 4). Two-thirds of parents reported that their adolescents liked cycling in general and approximately one-quarter of adolescents often cycled with their friends or a surveyed parent. Parental perceptions of their adolescents’ cycle skills and cycling in general did not differ across the three distance to school categories.
4. Discussion
     This study compared parental perceptions of adolescents’ walking versus cycling to school in an urban setting and exam-
ined whether mode-specific motivations and barriers differed by distance to school. Although the rates of ATS decreased
with increasing distance to school, most parents regarded both walking and cycling to work and school to be important, irrespective of the distance. As distance to school increased, parents more frequently reported ATS-related barriers including the
amount of material adolescents carry to school, the need for planning ahead, adolescents’ after-school schedule and convenience of driving adolescents to school as part of trip-chaining practices. When compared to walking, parents perceived
cycling to school to be less important, with less social support from parents, peers and school, less interest from adolescents,
less infrastructure support and more safety concerns. As distance from home to school increased, parental perceptions of
social support for walking to school decreased whereas personal, environmental and safety-related barriers increased;
although less consistent, similar findings were observed for cycling to school. These study findings are summarised in
Fig. 1. Two-thirds of parents expected to participate in decision-making related to their adolescent’s walking and/or cycling
to school. Thus, understanding and differentiating the motivations for and barriers to walking versus cycling to school as
perceived by parents/caregivers of adolescents are important for tailoring future ATS interventions. In other words, parents/-caregivers retain a critical role in ATS decision-making for teenagers.
    Even though using only ATS is not always feasible due to distance and/or safety issues, future initiatives should consider
creative ways to incite all adolescents (irrespective of their distance to school) to engage in ATS. An accessible, affordable,
reliable and frequent public transport service is one of the essential elements for supporting active transport in general
and reducing reliance on private vehicles (Mandic et al., 2020), and it plays an important role in encouraging ATS especially
among adolescents living beyond walking and/or cycling distance to their school (Mindell, Ergler, Hopkins, & Mandic, in
review). Encouraging the use of public bus (Mindell et al., in review) and/or mixed modes (Kek et al., 2019) as alternatives
to private vehicle travel for school journeys would help integrate active transport into adolescents’ school day routines and
may contribute to higher levels of physical activity (Kek et al., 2019). However, it has been reported that parental perceptions
of distance as a barrier to active commuting is often found in those who live within walkable and cyclable distances (Heelan
et al., 2005). Understanding perceptions is therefore important for designing acceptable and feasible solutions. Built environment interventions such as designing safe walking and cycling routes to school with drop-off and pick-up points within rea-
sonable walking and cycling distances to school could encourage even those adolescents living further away from school to
engage in ATS as part of their school journey (Rahman et al., 2020).
    Adolescent travel practices are better understood within the context of their family’s activities, travel and decision-making. In the present study, most parents expected to participate in ATS decision-making for their adolescent. In addition,
as distance to school increased, parents more frequently reported ATS-related personal barriers and convenience of driving
adolescents to school as part of trip-chaining practices. Trip chaining occurs where multiple stops with different purposes
take place along what has been reported as a single origin–destination route. Our recent work showed that half of any private vehicle trips related to adolescents’ travel to/from school involved trip chaining (Keall et al., in review). It is likely that as
adolescents’ distance to school increases, their parents may also travel greater distances to their place of work. This means
that whole-of-family travel decision making is likely to include motorised transport, with increased propensity of private
car-dependence and family trip-chaining. In addition, educational policies such as requirements to enrol in the closest school
or not have significant implications on adolescents’ transport to school patterns (Mandic et al., 2017). Combined with
findings previously reported among New Zealand adolescents (Emond & Handy, 2012), the current findings suggest also the
relevance of understanding individual perceptions of ATS as part of a broader socialisation process through which adolescents’ attitudes toward walking and cycling are shaped, at least in part, by their parents’ attitudes.
     Compared to walking, parents surveyed in this Dunedin study perceived cycling to school to be less important, with less
social support from parents, peers and school, less interest from adolescents, less infrastructure support and more safety
concerns. These findings extend similar findings previously reported among New Zealand urban adolescents living within
4 km from their school (Mandic et al., 2017) suggesting that walking and cycling have their own unique mode-specific personal, social, environmental and policy determinants which may also vary across countries, regions or cities/towns. For
example, in New Zealand, it is illegal to cycle on footpaths; given the limited availability or absence of separated cycleways
in New Zealand towns and cities, adolescents cycling to school are thereby forced to share the roads with motorised traffic
during peak commuting times.
     As distance to school increased, parental perceptions of social support for walking to school decreased whereas personal,
environmental and safety-related barriers increased. Although less consistent, similar findings were observed for cycling to
school. These findings are consistent with and extend the conclusions from a recent systematic review that identified built
environment characteristics, distance, traffic safety and motivation barriers are the main barriers to ATS reported by parents
of adolescents (Aranda-Balboa et al., 2019). It is also worth noting that parental perceptions of their adolescents’ cycle skills
and cycling in general did not differ across the three distance to school categories. This means that parental confidence in
their adolescent’s cycling skills may not be sufficient to mitigate the increasing perceived barriers for cycling associated with
greater distance to school even when living within a reasonable distance to school. Among other things, the hilly terrain,
required school uniforms, and lack of cycling infrastructure are barriers to cycling in Dunedin that would be magnified as
distance to school increases (Hopkins & Mandic, 2017; Mandic et al., 2017).
4.1. Implications
     These findings have implications for future studies and efforts to encourage ATS among adolescents. Rather than considering walking and cycling to school as one common active transport mode (Aibar et al., 2018; Huertas-Delgado et al., 2017;
Hume et al., 2009), they need to be examined separately and may require distinct strategies to address mode-specific
barriers.
     Distance to school should be taken into account as some ATS barriers such as traffic safety concerns, convenience of driving, and convenience of trip-chaining increase as distance to school increases. The impact of actions taken to minimise traffic
and safety concerns within school neighbourhoods, and address other personal barriers while strengthening social support
for ATS is likely to be enhanced by harnessing the value that parents attach to ATS, which was evidenced in this study.
    Our findings highlight the importance of improving traffic safety for adolescents living within cycling distance to school.
Parental concerns for cycling-related traffic safety are greater than for walking to school. Compared to other age groups, adolescents in New Zealand (Ministry of Transport, 2015) and Australia (Boufous, Rome, Senserrick, & Ivers, 2011) have the highest rates of bicycle-related crashes. In New Zealand, approximately one in five cyclists who die or are injured in traffic
crashes are between 10 and 19 years of age (Ministry of Transport, 2015). Minimising parental safety concerns is particularly
relevant for adolescents living beyond walkable but within reasonable cycling distance to school. Traffic safety-specific initiatives (such as mode separation infrastructure, creating safe routes to school, reducing distance to school by locating future
schools in proximity to or within residential areas, and/or considering policy interventions such as school zoning) could help
in part to minimize traffic safety concerns of adolescents and their parents related to both walking and cycling to school.
    Finally, strategies need to be designed to enable adolescents living beyond walking and cycling distance to school to integrate ATS as part of their daily school journey. Some of the strategies could include creating safe routes to school with drop-off/pick-up points within reasonable walking/cycling distance from secondary schools as well as providing accessible, affordable and convenient public transport.
    Taken together, the findings from this study further reiterate the importance of considering family factors, including parental perceptions of different modes of transport to school and parental concerns related to walking and cycling to school,
when designing initiatives to encourage ATS among adolescents. The findings also highlight the importance of understanding
the local social, cultural, regulatory, natural and built environment context considering that reasonable walking and cycling
distances to school and walking and cycling-specific barriers vary between cities, regions and countries. These results are
relevant not only to researchers but also to transport agencies, urban planners, city councils, schools as well as health
promoters.
4.2. Study strengths and limitations
    Strengths of this study include comprehensive data on parental perceptions of walking and cycling to school assessed
separately for each transport mode, objective measurements of distance to school, recruitment of parents from all 12 secondary schools in the study city and analysis of parental perceptions across mode-specific distance to school categories
for adolescents drawing upon local data and using available international evidence to assist with interpretation of findings.
    However, several limitations should be acknowledged including data collection from only one parent per household at a
single point in time, a relatively small sample size, lack of detail for complex trips (e.g. where trip chaining is used), non-probability sampling procedures, and lack of differentiation between parental (fathers) versus maternal (mothers) perceptions and between parental concerns regarding ATS-related traffic versus personal safety. For example, previous research
showed that mothers perceived different barriers to adolescents’ ATS compared to fathers living in the same household
(Aibar et al., 2018); recruiting similar numbers of mothers and fathers would allow for replication studies. Given the relatively small sample size and non-probability sampling procedures, the sample may not be representative of parents in
the community. Although examination of parental perceptions of both traffic and personal safety related to ATS in adolescents would have been desirable, this study collected only generic information about safety perceptions due to schools’ concerns related to asking their students and/or parents more specific safety-related questions as part of our study. In addition,
though this analysis identified parental perceptions that varied by mode choice and across distances, we did not examine
which perceptions were more salient in each of the distance categories according to mode choice. Finally, this study focused
exclusively on the perception of parents. Future studies with a larger sample size should examine whether distance to school
moderates adolescents’ and their parents’ perceptions of walking and cycling to school in different geographical areas
including hilly/flat areas and a range of urbanisation settings. Future studies should also take into account access to and
availability of public transport beyond cycling distance to school.
5. Conclusions
    Parents favoured their adolescents walking compared to cycling to school. Parental perceptions of both modes of ATS differed based on how far families lived from the adolescent’s school. As distance to school increased, so did parents’ reported
ATS-related barriers. Parents of households beyond cycling distance to school (>4 km) perceived less social support and more
personal, environmental, and safety-related barriers to walking compared to those living within walking (2.25 km) or
cycling (>2.25–4 km) distance to school. These findings suggest that future efforts to promote ATS among adolescents
should be mode-specific and take into account how far adolescents live from their school. To be successful, ATS initiatives
should also make an effort to engage parents of adolescents, understand their perceived barriers to ATS in the local context,
and address or minimize parental concerns since parents play a critical role in ATS decision making for teenagers.