A systematic review of disability’s treatment in the active
school travel and children’s independent mobility literatures
Timothy Rossa and Ronald Buliungb
    ABSTRACT                                                                               
    While various forms of social difference (e.g. gender, age, race/                      
    ethnicity, and class) have been engaged in the active school travel 
    (AST) and children’s independent mobility (CIM) literatures, one
    form has gone largely unconsidered: disability. Disregard for                          
    disability within these literatures is troubling, as it leaves children’s              
    experiences of disability associated with independent mobility and                 
    school travel unquestioned, which in turn helps to allow their                     
    experiences of exclusion to persist. This paper presents a systematic                
    review of the AST and CIM literatures that was undertaken with a
    view to providing insight into three questions. (1) To what extent is
    disability considered in the literatures in comparison to other forms
    of social difference? (2) How is disability engaged? (3) How could
    disability be approached differently such that experiences of
    children (and their households) living with disability are better
    accounted for moving forward (e.g. provided with equitable travel/
    mobility options)? Following a detailed consideration of the
    systematic review process, this paper presents figures and tables
    showing the extent to which disability has been considered in the
    two literatures in relation to other forms of social difference. To
    show how transport scholars and others are engaging disability,
    29 studies were identified for in-depth, qualitative review. These
    studies are summarized and then discussed in relation to their
    geographic focus, the forms of disability they considered, their
    treatment of children’s perspective and agency, and the disability
    perspectives they employed. It is suggested that disability and its
    relationships with other forms of social difference, as well as the
    largely unquestioned normalcy of children’s disability experiences,
    warrant further inquiry within the AST and CIM literatures. We
    propose that drawing upon a critical ableist studies perspective
    may be useful for any such inquiry due to its focus on ableism and
    normalcy, as well as its recognition of the complex intersectionality
    of disability experiences.
Introduction
While interest in children’s independent mobility (CIM) has grown steadily since the
early work of Mayer Hillman and colleagues (Hillman, Adams, & Whitelegg, 1990), it
can reasonably be said that this interest has spiked in recent years among transport scholars, policy-makers, and practitioners. Active school travel (AST), a field closely related to
CIM, has also been subject to recent, heightened interest. CIM can be regarded as children’s “freedom to travel around their own neighbourhood or city without adult supervision” (Tranter & Whitelegg, 1994, p. 265), and AST can be viewed as a child’s trip to/from
school using travel modes that are (semi-)independent and self-propelled (e.g. walking
and cycling; McMillan, Day, Boarnet, Alfonzo, & Anderson, 2006). Increased attention to
these fields has come about largely in response to widespread declines throughout the
Global North in CIM (Barker, 2011; Mitra, Faulkner, Buliung, & Stone, 2014), AST (Active
Healthy Kids Canada, 2014; Buliung, Mitra, & Faulkner, 2009; Evenson, Huston, McMillen,
Bors, & Ward, 2003; Fusco et al., 2012, 2013; Larsen et al., 2012; Mammen, Stone,
Buliung, & Faulkner, 2015; McDonald, 2007; Tranter, 2006), and children’s physical activity
levels (Buliung, Faulkner, Beesley, & Kennedy, 2011; Faulkner, Richichi, Buliung, Fusco, &
Moola, 2010; Hillman, 2006); an increase in childhood overweight/obesity rates (Tremblay
et al., 2010); and concerns about how these changes may add to longer term implications
of an obesity epidemic (Hillman, 2006). In the context of these unsettling changes and
concerns, school trips (i.e. the most regular daily travel practice of children) and, specifically, the advancement of AST have come to be widely regarded as an important opportunity for advancing CIM and physical activity levels, and gaining associated health and
well-being benefits (Larsen, Gilliland, & Hess, 2012). This has resulted in AST policy contexts, which require evidence-based research.1
    Researchers have striven to understand and advance AST by analysing obesogenic
built environments, automobility, and traffic safety (Buliung et al., 2014; Wen et al.,
2008; Whitzman, Worthington, & Mizrachi, 2010); how school site planning requirements
and home-to-school distances affect school travel patterns (Larsen et al., 2012; Martin &
Carlson, 2005; McMillan et al., 2006; Southworth, 2005); and how parents conceptualise
childhood and safety risks, and make decisions about school travel and CIM (Faulkner
et al., 2010; Holloway & Valentine, 2000; Malone, 2007). To a rather limited extent,
they have also aimed to understand how various forms of social difference (e.g.
gender (see Buliung et al., 2014; Hanson, 2010; Larsen et al., 2012; McMillan et al.,
2006; Murray, 2009; Valentine, 1997), age (see Buliung, Sultana, & Faulkner, 2012; Mitra,
2013; Van Loon & Frank, 2011), race/ethnicity (see Malone & Rudner, 2011), and class
(see Faulkner et al., 2010; Fusco et al., 2012; Malone, 2007)) influence school travel
decisions and patterns. However, one form of social difference has largely been
ignored: disability. Such neglect may be due to children with disabilities being viewed
as too vulnerable to join general education classes, requiring protection, and in turn
being excluded from these classes (Kavale & Forness, 2000). However, the increasingly
common practice of mainstreaming (i.e. integrating) children living with disability into
general education classes and environments makes it troubling to observe a disregard
for disability in AST and CIM research and practice. Such disregard leaves children’s
experiences of disability during school travel unquestioned and allows negative dimensions of such experiences to persist.
    This systematic review of the CIM and AST literatures was undertaken to better understand how disability is addressed in those related bodies of work. The review is constructed around three questions. (1) To what extent is disability considered in the
literature in comparison to other forms of social difference? (2) How is disability
engaged? (3) How could disability be approached differently such that experiences of disabled children and their households are better accounted for moving forward (e.g. provided with equitable travel options)? To address these questions and provide necessary
context, the following sections explain the review process, consider insights gleaned
from literature search result totals, discuss issues concerning disability’s treatment in
the literatures, and suggest that employing a critical ableist studies (CAS; Goodley,
2014) perspective could be useful in CIM/AST research.
Review process
The review involved database searches of peer-reviewed articles published over the past 50
years (1966–2015).2 The fields of AST and CIM are closely linked as AST patterns influence CIM
practices, and vice versa; in turn, both AST and CIM literatures are considered to inquire into
disability’s treatment. Searches were conducted from January to March 2016, and were
applied to Web of Science, Medline (via Ovid), PubMed, Scopus, and Sociological Abstracts
(via ProQuest). Searches were applied to abstracts, titles, and keywords.3 The authors developed various search functions by considering other articles’ keywords and AST/CIM-specific
search terms, using truncation and proximity4 search operators, and applying Boolean operators and indexing language specific to each database. Three levels of search (i.e. primary,
secondary, and tertiary) were conducted for both literatures across all five databases.
These search functions served as the foundation to secondary searches conducted to gain
an insight into the extent to which disability has been engaged in the two literatures in
comparison to gender, age, race/ethnicity, and class. Primary search function 1.2 was
incorporated into the review in order to capture articles that are beyond, but related to
the school travel literature (i.e. articles concerning CIM). Primary searches 1.1 and 1.2
were separately searched in conjunction (via an “AND” operator) with each of the following secondary search function add-ons specific to gender, age, race/ethnicity, class, and
disability.
Search result totals (i.e. number of articles) for the 50 secondary searches7 were recorded
to facilitate comparisons of the varying degrees to which the five forms of social difference
have been engaged. Inclusion/exclusion criteria were not incorporated into these search
result total comparisons.
    Tertiary searches were used to gain insight into how disability has been engaged in
conjunction with other forms of social difference. These searches involved appending secondary search function 2.5 (i.e. the disability search) onto the other secondary searches
using an “AND” operator. For example, the search used to consider the extent to which
disability is engaged in conjunction with gender in the CIM literature.
Search result totals for the 40 tertiary searches8 were recorded so that they could be compared to consider the extent to which disability has been engaged in conjunction with the
other forms of social difference in the literatures.
    The authors recognise that comparing search result totals cannot flawlessly show the
degree to which forms of social difference are considered/present in the literature.
Instead, the search result totals are treated as general indicators of each social difference’s
presence in the literatures, which can be considered to draw comparisons to gain insight
into saturations and gaps in research. Further, there are countless ways that such a project
could be undertaken (e.g. differences in search terms, truncations and proximity search
functions, search periods, databases searched, Boolean operators used to assemble
search functions, as well as varied inclusion/exclusion criteria for the articles to be read).
However, search functions were developed with care and applied consistently across databases in an effort to provide some insights into how disability is considered in the AST and
CIM literatures in comparison to other forms of social difference.
    Only articles from the disability-specific secondary searches (i.e. search functions 1.1 +
2.5 and 1.2 + 2.5) were collected, filtered through an inclusion/exclusion process, and
reviewed in detail. To be included for review, an article had to meet the following criteria:
.  Be written in English;
.  Be published between 1966 and 2015;
.  Be in a peer-reviewed, scholarly journal;
.  Present primary quantitative, qualitative, or mixed-methods research;
.  Concern research focused on the Global North;9 and
.  Concern research that involved child/youth/adolescent and/or parent participants (i.e.
   reviews and discussions of models/frameworks were excluded).
The 10 searches (2 searches × 5 databases) produced 490 references (105 for AST, 385 for
CIM). Table 1 breaks down the 490 results by database:
    Through the removal of duplicate references and an initial screening where the
inclusion/exclusion criteria were applied to titles and abstracts, a total of 45 articles (16
AST, 29 CIM) were identified for further consideration. Through a second screening,
where article bodies were searched/read to confirm the inclusion/exclusion criteria, it was
determined that an additional 21 should be excluded, resulting in 24 articles (5 AST, 19
CIM). Following this process, one relevant AST article (Stephens et al., 2015) known to
the authors that did not emerge in the search results (perhaps due to its recent December
2015 publication) was incorporated into the review. By reviewing the included articles’
reference lists, four additional studies (see Anaby et al., 2014; Foley & McCubbin, 2009;
Pivik, 2010; Pivik et al., 2002) were identified, screened, and included. A total of 29 articles
(10 AST, 19 CIM) were identified and reviewed. Figure 1 provides an overview of the review
process.
Results
Review results are presented in two forms: (1) a discussion of the search result totals from
the primary, secondary, and tertiary searches and the insights they provide into how the
Figure 1. Overview of systematic review process. Source: Prepared by authors.
AST and CIM literatures consider disability; and (2) a qualitative review of the articles identified through the disability-specific secondary literature searches.
Search result totals
For context, the primary search result totals used to identify the AST and CIM literatures are
shown in Table 2, organised by database and by time period.
    Finding markedly fewer references for AST (2,962) than CIM (13,208) is understandable
since the former has a smaller scope and is generally a newer field, as indicated by the
breakdown of the 50-year search period (i.e. 1966–1990 and 1991–2015). The 1966–
1990 result totals for CIM and AST represent only 13.8% and 1.7% of their respective literatures over the 50-year search period. These data suggest that while little attention was
paid to CIM prior to 1991, even less attention was given to AST.
    The secondary search result totals suggest clear differences in the degree to which the
five forms of social difference have been engaged in the literatures. Figure 2 suggests that
gender and age are present in the AST and CIM research, race/ethnicity and class have a
lesser but still somewhat substantial presence, and disability has largely been overlooked.
These data suggest three distinct tiers of engagement with social difference in the literatures: (1) upper tier: significant attention paid to gender and age; (2) middle tier: somewhat
substantial attention paid to race/ethnicity and class; and (3) lower tier: little attention paid
to disability.
    This tiered engagement suggests the presence of ableism within the AST and CIM literatures. Ableism can be viewed as a set of beliefs, processes, and practices informed
by normative values that prioritise an idealised “species-typical” (see Campbell, 2009)
human being,10 which produces “favoritism for certain abilities [such as] cognition, competiveness or consumerism and the often negative sentiment towards the lack of favored
abilities” (Wolbring, 2007, p. 1; in Goodley, 2014, p. 22). Through the normalised prioritisation of idealised abilities, such as walking or being ambulatory in general, ableism is “the
system from which forms of disablism, hetero/sexism and racism emanate” (Goodley,
2014, p. 22).
    Table 3 deconstructs search result totals for each form of social difference (i.e. the sum
of result totals from all databases) into its presence (%) within the AST, CIM, and joint AST/
CIM literatures. The data suggest disability has received remarkably little attention in AST
and CIM research not only in comparison to other social differences, but also in relation to
the literature overall (e.g. its 3.0% presence in the AST/CIM literature).
    Gender and age should be continually considered in AST and CIM research as they are
widely regarded to have notable influences on children’s school travel patterns, mobility
practices, and parenting approaches. However, it appears that more attention should be
given to race/ethnicity, class, and especially disability. Further inquiry into disability (and
also race/ethnicity and class) may help with uncovering how it affects and shapes children’s transportation, and vice versa; identifying and addressing unrecognised issues;
and developing new approaches to advancing AST and CIM that account for disability
in terms of its experience and contribution to diversity. Such an inquiry could also help
to implement existing disability-related AST/CIM policy directions that are at times
ignored and thus not implemented.11 Ideally, the types of social difference described
here should be jointly considered in future research.
    Figure 3 presents the tertiary search result totals by showing (1) a breakdown of the
secondary search result totals for gender, age, race/ethnicity, and class in terms of their
share (%) of the secondary search literature;12 and (2) the presence (%) of disability. Percentages are based on the joint AST/CIM literature. The presence of gender, age, race/eth-
nicity, and class within the AST/CIM literature considering these social differences is 33.3%,
39.3%, 12.1%, and 15.3%, respectively. The tertiary search totals indicate that disability
overlaps into 9.8%, 7.5%, 4.8%, and 7.5% of the AST/CIM literature concerning gender,
age, race/ethnicity, and class, respectively.13 Figures 4 and 5 show where disability overlaps with other forms of social difference in the AST and CIM literatures. When disability
is considered in conjunction with social difference, it is most often considered in relation
to gender and age, the two forms of social difference most frequently considered in these
bodies of work.
    Figures 4 and 5 indicate that little research exists where disability is engaged alongside
class (15.3% in AST; 13.8% in CIM) and especially race/ethnicity (13.4% in AST; 3.8% in CIM).
Inattention to disability’s intersection with class in these literatures is troubling, given that
childhood disability can be remarkably costly for households in terms of time and money,
and government support for medical/accessible services and technologies is at times
inadequate. Class and income/employment-related matters can contribute to the compounding of challenges for households without resources to manage the financial cost
of some types of childhood disability. Further, economic challenges associated with disability experiences have been recognised as leading to the (re)inscription and deepening
of class divisions (Erevelles, 2000). Inattention to disability’s intersection with race/ethnicity
is also troubling, given that “[b]eing white is historically contingent with being intelligent,
civilized, and able”, and that the elision of these two differences could help to direct/fix
attention on the “dominant and symbolic elements of culture that mark people of
colour and disabled people as Other” (Goodley, 2014, p. 44). These limitations suggest
that it would be valuable to consider how disability experiences configure with those of
race/ethnicity and class.
Review and discussion
To discuss disability’s engagement in the 29 studies, four issues are considered: (1) geographic focus, (2) forms of disability considered, (3) children’s perspectives and agency,
and (4) disability perspectives. The CAS perspective is then discussed to explore how its
use may help researchers to critically engage ableist elements within the normative ordering of transportation, mobility, and everyday life. Table 4 summarises the characteristics of
the 29 reviewed studies.
Geographic focus
The vast majority of reviewed AST/CIM studies concerning disability emerged from two
geographic areas: North America (13: 8 from Canada, 4 from the U.S.A.; 1 from both
Canada and the U.S.A.) and the Nordic countries (12: 8 from Sweden, 3 from Norway,
and 1 from Iceland). While this concentration was anticipated, its degree was not. The concentration clearly indicates that there are two key geographic areas where disability has
been given attention in relation to AST and CIM. It was unexpected that searches would
produce no primary disability-related AST/CIM studies from Australia or New Zealand
that met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. The notable North American/Nordic focus in
the literature indicates that there is a need for consideration of disability in AST/CIM
research elsewhere in the Global North, and essentially everywhere else.
Forms of disability
The studies provide a range of findings14 pertaining to the mobility, travel, health, and
well-being of children with various forms of disability. These forms of disability include
developmental (Falkmer, Anund, Sorensen, & Falkmer, 2004), cognitive (Falkmer et al.,
2014), intellectual (Einarsson et al., 2015; Foley & McCubbin, 2009), sensory (Douglas,
Pavey, Corcoran, & Clements, 2012; Porcelli, Ungar, Liebenberg, & Trépanier, 2014), and,
most prominently, physical (Alriksson-Schmidt, Wallander, & Biasini, 2006; Stephens
et al., 2015; Wiart, Darrah, Cook, Hollis, & May, 2003).15 Many of the studies concerning
physical disability focused specifically on children with cerebral palsy (CP; e.g. Ahl, Johans-
son, Granat, & Brogren Carlberg, 2005; Gibson et al., 2012; McKeever, Rossen, Scott, Robin-
son-Vincent, & Wright, 2013; see also Østensjø et al., 2005; Palisano et al., 2009; Soulis &
Andreou, 2007; Van Wely et al., 2014; Wiart et al., 2003). This focus may be understood
as a result of CP being the most prevalent motor disability in childhood (Østensjø, 
Brogren Carlberg, & Vøllestad, 2005). However, differences in the source and type of injury/
disease and phenotype across children, even among those who share a common diagnosis, mean that researchers and practitioners can expect to discover diverse experiences
that challenge normative ideas about mobility, movement, and transport.
    Investigating the diverse experiences of children living with different physical impairments, and also forms of disability that are not physical in nature, could help with uncovering previously unobserved issues, policy/practice gaps, education access issues, and
new solutions. Further, it could help to advance AST, CIM, and children’s transportation
in general in ways that connect to and are considerate of their everyday material conditions, activities, and challenges. It could also be useful to work towards recognising
and better understanding how category/classification-defying comorbidities can
produce a childhood inhabited by acute and/or chronic forms of medical complexity,
which can be further complicated by normatively constructed social systems, institutions,
and infrastructures unprepared to adequately and justly meet their needs. The experiences of children living with disability in these ways have received notably less attention
than that of those with physical disability in AST and CIM research.
Children’s perspective and agency
Most reviewed studies considered children’s perspectives through methods that asked
them to report/describe their experiences. While considering children’s descriptions is
surely valuable, it may prove particularly useful to design studies from a position that
views children as active social agents capable of critical thought, values their input, and
prioritises voicing their narratives (Fusco, Moola, Faulkner, Buliung, & Richichi, 2012).
    Various studies have considered children’s perspectives in order to use their input to evaluate health- and travel-related programmes/interventions (Anaby et al., 2014; Falkmer et al.,
2014; Østensjø et al., 2005; see also Alriksson-Schmidt et al., 2006; Gürsel & Koruç, 2011;
Van Wely et al., 2014). In other studies, children’s perspectives were considered to explore
and describe their experiences of mobility and transportation (see Palisano et al., 2009; Porcelli
et al., 2014; Wiart et al., 2003), relationships (Skär & Tamm, 2001), and quality of life (Einarsson
et al., 2015; Jemta, Dahl, Fugl-Meyer, & Stensman, 2005; Jemta, Fugl-Meyer, Oberg, & Dahl,
2009). Children’s participation in these studies typically stops at describing experiences and
does not involve them providing their critical input (e.g. they are not asked what they
would change about their school trips and how, or what things are significant/important to
them). However, a few studies (see Porcelli et al., 2014; Pivik, 2010; Pivik et al., 2002; Stephens
et al., 2015) have viewed child participants as active, capable social agents and purposefully
engaged their critical thinking using tailored methods. For example, in Pivik’s (2010) study,
children with and without disabilities were asked to evaluate schools’ architectural barriers
alongside school principals and special education resource teachers (SERT). Children with
and without disabilities viewed the same environments differently from principals and
SERTs, and found more barriers than them; and children living with disability demonstrated
a clear capability for assessing their environments (Pivik, 2010, p. 515). This indicates value
in introducing not only children’s descriptions of experiences into studies, but also their critical
thinking. In noting this, the intent is in no way to criticise research focused exclusively on children’s experiences; these studies surely help with understanding their material conditions
and identifying issues. Instead, the aim is to stress the value of going beyond description
by seeking critical input from children living with disability, as their thoughts, needs,
desires, and ideas are just as unique as their experiences, and may provide invaluable contributions to any transportation planning study or project.
Disability perspectives
Expectedly, some reviewed studies drew upon the biomedical (Einarsson et al., 2015; Van
Wely, Balemans, Becher, & Dallmeijer, 2014) and social (Soulis & Andreou, 2007) models of
disability. The biomedical model locates disability within the body and treats it as an individualised issue, while the social model rejects such assumptions and instead views disability as (1) imposed by society’s failure to account for disabled people, and (2)
systematically felt by disabled people as a group (Oliver, 1996). Many studies, however,
have moved past the dualistic thinking of these models by drawing upon numerous
other approaches,16 none more so than the World Health Organization’s (WHO) International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) approach (see Alriks-
son-Schmidt et al., 2006; Douglas et al., 2012; Østensjø et al., 2005; Wiart et al., 2003).
    The ICF approach, informed by biopsychosocial (BPS) model thinking (see Engel, 1977),
views disability as arising from a combination of physical, emotional, and environmental
factors (WHO, 2001, p. 20). In turn, the approach is useful for overcoming any body/
social world divide by questioning disability in a manner that synthesises its bodily, personal, social, and environmental dimensions. While the common use of ICF has produced
valuable findings reflecting the complexity of disability experiences’ bodily, emotional,
and social aspects,17 it (and other approaches) has mostly left the normalcy of disability
experiences in children’s transportation (i.e. the acceptance and tolerance of disabled children’s exclusion, or delivery of substandard equipment/services) unquestioned. Normative
conceptualisations, values, beliefs, and processes that may be ableist in nature, and in turn
allow disability experiences in children’s transportation to be “okayed” and persist, have
gone largely unconsidered.18
    Not questioning conceptualisations, values, beliefs, and processes that are foundational
to, and which (re)produce disability experiences in children’s transportation is worrying.
This is because they play a role in allowing disabled children to be viewed as a “justifiably
excludable-type” or, even when included, to be treated as “included as excludable” (e.g.
children may be provided access to a school yard, but not its playground; or, they may
be provided access to a school building or transit station, but only through one entrance;
Boys, 2014, p. 176; Titchkosky, 2011, p. 78).
    Ableist elements within our conceptualisations, values, beliefs, and processes might be
regarded as “upstream” problems that allow for the manifestation of “downstream” problems (i.e., disabling barriers) in our material conditions (and the everyday experiences
they produce). If “upstream” problems within a normative ordering go unquestioned,
the reproduction of “downstream” exclusionary material conditions will continue undiminished in scope and intensity. The CAS perspective could arguably be used to think about
ways to move transport scholars, practitioners, and governments beyond disablism in the
study, production, and operation of transportation systems and their use.19
The critical ableist studies perspective
In questioning an inaccessible bus service or school entrance, CAS researchers would not
only contemplate design, user experiences, and the practices that produced them. They
would also engage the system of ableism (i.e. the normative beliefs, values, and processes
that prioritise an idealised type of human being and perpetuate favouritism for certain
abilities) that allowed the inaccessible designs to be viewed as normal/acceptable,
which in turn enabled their realisation. To question ableism, the CAS perspective
employs a conception of disability that gives primacy to normalcy (Titchkosky, 2011). In
other words, it does not question disability independently of (or prioritise it over) other
social differences; rather, it encompasses and embraces all of them and their complex
intersectionality to gain insights into how a normative order produces normalcy and, consequently, disability. Disability is thus elided into the nexus of social difference and power
that produces normalcy, and its experience is viewed as an output of normalcy.
    The value of the CAS perspective’s intersectionality becomes apparent when one considers that when experiencing disability, a person is also experiencing other social differences and their cultural/material relations. For example, gender and age are widely known
to influence how parents make decisions concerning school travel and CIM (e.g. parents
thinking in relation to gendered risk narratives; making decisions to meet gendered
“good parent” expectations; having fears about active travel that vary by children’s age;
and viewing/treating children differently on the basis of gender and age; see Barker,
Kraftl, Horton, & Tucker, 2009; Buliung et al., 2014; Faulkner et al., 2010; Larsen et al.,
2012; Valentine, 1996). Children’s experiences of disability during school travel are not
divorced from gender and age; rather, disability is experienced alongside them and
affected by their associated mobility and mode choice norms. School travel patterns
and CIM practices of children living with disability are not singularly shaped by disability,
and should not be treated as such in research, policy, and practice.
    In addition to helping to refine understandings of and criticisms towards normalcy and
its ordering (e.g. the normalised exclusion of disability in school travel planning, or the
singular focus on disability in accessibility planning), using a CAS perspective to consider
children’s everyday experiences of disability in conjunction with other social differences
may help with identifying new issues and correlations within and between experiences
of marginalisation associated with school travel. Its use may also help to build alliances
with researchers across associated fields of study and practice. For instance, if children’s
transportation researchers focusing on disability were to work with others engaging
gender, age, race/ethnicity, and/or class, they may find alliances through the identification
of issues that they could (or should) work on together and/or policy approaches to one
social difference that could be applied to another. By giving primacy to normalcy and,
in doing so, simultaneously considering multiple forms of social difference, a CAS perspective could help with developing and implementing built environment, system, and service
designs that account for more forms of social difference and are, in turn, more inclusive.
    A nuanced, intersectional approach, such as that provided by a CAS perspective, could
help with questioning and revising marginalising school travel patterns, their normalisation, and their (re)production. Since the normalcy of children’s experiences of disability
has gone largely unquestioned in the AST and CIM literatures, as has the relationship
between disability and other social differences (e.g. race/ethnicity and class in particular),
drawing on the CAS perspective in future AST and CIM research could be a helpful step
towards addressing research, policy, intervention, and infrastructure gaps while disrupting
the normalisation of children’s experiences of disability during school travel.
Conclusion
This review has identified numerous issues concerning the (in)attention given to disability
in the AST and CIM literatures. Data from search result totals indicate that disability has
gone largely unconsidered, and has received notably less attention than other forms of
social difference, including gender, age, race/ethnicity, and class. Further, when disability
has been engaged, it has rarely been considered alongside race/ethnicity and class, which
is troubling given they are jointly experienced and are known to have relationships worthy
of investigation (Erevelles, 2000; Goodley, 2014).
    Upon closer review of the 29 identified studies where disability was considered, issues
were identified with respect to the treatment of disability in the AST/CIM literature. A significant geographic focus was found, as the majority of studies emerged from North
America and the Nordic countries. This indicates a need for AST/CIM researchers to study
disability elsewhere in the Global North (and beyond). Most of the research was also
found to have focused on children with mobility impairments, especially those living
with CP. Paying more attention to the experiences of children with different types of mobility impairments brought on by different causes and those living with other types of disability (e.g. cognitive, sensory, and intellectual), separately or in combination, should be
encouraged. Doing so may help with more fully understanding the diversity of disability
experiences in everyday school travel, as well as developing planning interventions that
account for the varied school travel needs and desires of children living with disability.
    The participation of children living with disability was found to have been mostly
limited to describing experiences, leaving their critical views unconsidered. Given the
unique positionality of children (living with disability), and the insightful and meaningful
input they have provided in the past studies (Fusco et al., 2012; Pivik, 2010), viewing and
engaging children as active social agents capable of critical thought, and designing studies
to engage their critical thinking may help to ensure their needs, desires, and ideas are considered. In turn, this may help with the development and advancement of more inclusive
planning policy and interventions.
    Various perspectives on disability are used in the AST/CIM literature, with the ICF
approach being drawn upon most often. In general, the perspectives used to consider disability have left ableist conceptualisations, beliefs, values, and practices, as well as their
normative ordering of disability largely unconsidered. Since a CAS perspective supports
investigations of normalcy and ableist aspects of its ordering, and does so by focusing
attention on how social differences are experienced in conjunction with one another, it
is suggested that a CAS viewpoint may be useful in future research. Engaging disability
in conjunction with other social differences could help to fill a gap in the literature (e.g.
disability’s relationship with race/ethnicity and class in the fields of AST and CIM). It
may also produce opportunities to identify new issues that could (or should) be considered in collaboration with researchers and practitioners across other fields, and also
aid with refining understandings of normalcy and its influence on the school travel patterns and mobility practices of children living with disability. By helping researchers to
engage and address ableist elements, a CAS viewpoint may very well aid with identifying
and addressing any “upstream” problems in disability’s normative ordering that allow for
“downstream” disabling barriers to be (re)produced in the everyday material conditions of
school travel experienced by children living with disability.

