The influence of parents’ travel patterns, perceptions
and residential self-selectivity to their children travel
mode shares
Abstract Using the UK National Travel Survey from 2002 to 2006, this paper investigates the influence of households’ residential self-selectivity, parents’ perceptions on
accessibilities and their travel patterns on their children daily travel mode share. In doing
this, this study introduces a model structure that represents the complex interactions
between the parents’ travel patterns, their perceptions on public transport services and their
reported residential self-selectivity reasons and the children travel mode shares. This
structure is analysed with structural equation modelling. The model estimation results
show that parents’ residential self-selectivity, parents’ perceptions and satisfactions on
accessibilities and their daily travel patterns significantly influence the children’s daily
travel mode shares. However, the effects are not uniform across household members. This
study has revealed that households’ residential self-selectivity behaviours have more
correlations with the children’s non-motorised mode shares, whilst the parents’ perceptions
and satisfactions on transport infrastructure and public transport service qualities have
more correlations with parents’ mode shares. The results also confirm that parents’ non-motorised modes use in travelling is highly correlated with the children’s physically active
travel mode shares. However, at the same time, the results also show that the effects of
mothers’ car use to the children travel mode shares is more apparent than fathers’.

Introduction
Recently there has been an emerging body of research into children travel behaviour,
including active transport to school (such as walking and bicycling), which shows that
physically active children are healthier and more socially connected than children who
have more sedentary lifestyle (US Department of Health and Human Service 2008; World
Health Organization (WHO) 2008). Previous studies have shown that active travel is
positively associated with higher daily levels of physical activity (Rosenberg et al. 2006)
and higher cardiorespiratory fitness (Andersen et al. 2009). Given that healthy habits
developed during adolescence may have a significant impact on the life-long health of
individuals (Millstein and Litt 1990) it is very important to introduce a healthy and
independent lifestyle as early as possible. Lanzendorf (2003) argued that how we grow up
will influence the way we travel, including our perspectives on travel modes and our habits
and Simma and Axhausen (2003) found that the use of a particular travel mode positively
influences the usage of the same mode for the rest of an individual’s life course, and the
usage of other modes negatively.
    Despite the importance of the introduction of active and independent travel1 to an
individual during their earlier life period, the rates of active transportation to school have
declined dramatically over the past 30 years in many countries. Using data from the 2001
US National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) McDonald (2007) showed that 36 % of
children’s trips of less than one mile to school were by private car (an increase from 7 % in
1969) with the percentage of walking and bicycle trips being 55 % within that same
distance (a decrease from 87 % in 1969). Similar trends have been found in Australia (van
der Ploeg et al. 2008), Canada (Buliung et al. 2009) and Japan (Susilo and Waygood 2012).
    In order to understand this problem, there have been studies that explored the relationships between children travel behaviours and their built environment conditions.
McDonald (2008) reported that children living in neighbourhoods with higher residential
density and mixed land use were more likely to walk for school travel purposes. Mitra and
Buliung (2012) found that factors like travel distance, block density, signalised intersections, walking density, and schools in low-income neighbourhoods were associated with
active travel. These findings are also supported by other studies, such as Lin and Chang
(2010) in Taiwan, which showed that high shade-tree density and high sidewalk coverage
encouraged children to walk to school independently, while large city block sizes and
increased numbers of intersections discouraged children from walking to school
independently.
    However, whilst the built environment factors found to be important, at the same time,
the previous studies (e.g. Di Guiseppi et al. 1998; Chillo´n et al. 2011) also highlighted the
importance of including parents’ perceptions in analysing children’s travel pattern. Waygood and Susilo (2011) found that, despite similarity in gross domestic product (GDP)
output, after socio-demographic, travel and built environment variables have been controlled, the UK and Japan have significantly different participation rates of children’s
active travel modes. Presumably this is due to differences in the culture and parenting
system, especially the social norm and parents’ responsibility in allowing children to travel
independently to their school. Based on California data, Hsu and Saphores (2013) found
that, among the parents who are holding equal concerns and attitudes on chauffeuring
behaviours, mothers are still more likely than fathers to chauffeur their children to school.
Moreover, if we put it into a household’s perspective, children’s transport mode to school
is an integral part of the household decision-making process (Black et al. 2001) and
includes many factors such as the possibility of linking the school journey with the journey
to work, convenience, parental concerns about road safety, social and cultural norms
(Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008; Grize et al. 2010). Therefore, it is important to understand the influence of parents’ perceptions and their activity-travel constraints to their
children travel mode choice and analyse it under one integrated decision structure. This
would be the aim of this research.
   Using the UK National Travel Survey (NTS), this study examines the influence of
parents’ and children’s socio-demographic and their built environment characteristics on
their daily travel mode shares and how these interact with each other in one integrated
model structure. Parents’ perceptions of public transport qualities and reported residential
self-selectivity behaviours are also included in the analysis. Although there has been a
general consensus that the denser the urban structure, particularly when locating a mix of
uses in close proximity to each other, the less dependence there is on the car, Handy et al.
(2005) and Moktharian and Cao (2008) argue that there is a lack of understanding of to
what extent the observed behaviours are the result of the prior self-selection of residents
into built environment conditions that is consistent with their predispositions towards
certain travel modes and land use configurations. In-line with this, despite all the sustainable features available within the studied neighbourhoods, Susilo et al. (2012) found
that the residents’ reasons for moving into the newly built sustainable developments are a
crucial factor that influence whether the residents will travel in a more sustainable manner
than the rest of the population.
   The next section describes the dataset used in this study and the profiles of the samples.
Then, a descriptive analysis on the relationships of parents’ perceptions and household’s
residential self-selection with the household members’ travel patterns and mode shares are
provided. An integrated model structure that includes all mentioned aspects above then is
introduced and the estimation results are described. The paper is closed with a conclusion
section.
Data and sample profiles
This paper draws on data from the UK NTS which provides detailed information about
individuals, households and their 7-days trip engagements. The UK NTS is a series of
household surveys designed to provide regular, up-to-date data on personal travel and
monitor changes in travel behaviour over time. It was designed to provide a representative
sample of households in Great Britain for each survey year. The sampling process was
based on a stratified two-stage random probability sample of private households in Great
Britain. It was first collected in 1965/1966, and it was repeated on an ad-hoc basis in
1972/1973, 1975/1976, 1978/1979, and 1985/1986. In July 1988, the NTS became a
continuous survey (i.e. fieldwork was conducted on a monthly basis) with an annual set
sample size of 5,040 addresses which had increased to 5,796 by 2001. In 2002 the annual
set sample size increased to 15,048 addresses (Cronberg et al. 2007). In the analysis, we
used data from 2002 to 2006 and focused on the traditional households with two adult
members, who are assumed to be taking ‘parent’ roles within the household, and which
also had at least with one child member. The general samples’ socio-demographic profiles
and travel characteristics of the used dataset are summarized in Table 1. The total number
of travellers on NTS from 2002 to 2006 is 76,362 households, whilst the number of
households with two adult members and at least one child, which are the focus on the
analysis, is 30,645. The fathers are dominated by the full time workers with older average
age than the mothers (see Table 1 below).
    As shown in Table 1, the subsamples we are focussing on (the group of households with
two adults/parents member with at least one child) have children’s socio-demographic
profiles which are relatively similar to the rest of the NTS dataset population. On the
parents’ characteristics, the subsamples have a higher proportion of working parents,
higher income households and parents with access to private car than the rest of the
population.
    Focusing only on households with two adult members and how their travel engagements
vary across different sizes of cities, it is shown on Table 2 that, on average, the mothers
made more trips than the fathers and their children. However, the levels of private car use
between parents were comparable. Moreover, the households who live in smaller cities
made more trips than those who live in bigger cities/more built up areas. Interestingly, the
highest participation of cycling for children is not in the most dense areas (the biggest
cities), which has the highest participation of cycling for parents, but among those who live
in medium cities which have population between 25,000 and 250,000 and the highest
walking proportion for children is found among children who live in cities with
10,000–25,000 residents.
The influence of parents’ perceptions and residential self-selections
The descriptive analysis on the influence of parents’ perceptions on the local public
transport quality and residential self-selections to the households’ mode shares are shown
in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. It is important to note here that every household has only
one set of responses on their perception of public transport quality and residential self-selection, which is likely from a joint response from both parents. The parents’ perceptions that were collected within the given NTS dataset were their perceptions on the
quality of the road transport infrastructure and public transport (PT) services within their
neighbourhood. The parents were asked to evaluate on a scale of 1–5 (very satisfied/very
frequent to very dissatisfied/infrequent): (1) the overall satisfaction with the existing bus
service, (2) the frequency of the existing bus service, (3) the reliability of the bus
service, (4) the frequency of rail and other public transport services, (5) the reliability of
rail and other public transport services, (6) the quality of local pavement conditions, and
(7) the cycle path. Further, the parents (adult household members) were also asked the
reason they moved to the neighbourhood. They were asked whether they moved to the
existing location because of looking for (1) a better neighbourhood, (2) better public
transport, (3) a larger or better house/flat, (4) closer to work/school, (5) closer to family/
friends, (6) closer to shops/leisure facilities, (7) a smaller or cheaper house/flat, (8)
change of employment, (9) moved in/split up with partner, (10) wanted to buy, (11) to
live independently, or (12) any other reasons. To test the effect of households’ residential
self-selections (the reasons why they choose to live in a particular neighbourhood), the
relationships between the options of 1–8 against their existing travel pattern and travel
mode choices were examined further and special dummies were created and integrated
into the model structure.
    Table 3 shows that the household groups in which the parents had good bus service
satisfaction and positive perceptions on bus frequency and service reliability had higher
proportions of parents’ non-motorised and public transport modes and their children
walking trips than the ones who were dissatisfied with or had negative perceptions of
the bus services. At the same time, the parents who had a positive perception of the
quality of the local pavements drove private car and cycled more than their
counterparts.
    The household groups who had positive perceptions on rail’s and other public transport
modes’ frequency and reliability had higher proportions of public transport use and lower
private car use than their counterparts. But the effects were relatively small compared to
the effects of good perceptions of bus services.
    The children and their parents who come from household groups with a positive perception in cycle path quality had a higher cycling participation than their counterparts. The
parents from this group also had a lower car use than the ones who did not have good
appreciation of the quality of the existing cycle path, but not for the children.
    Unlike the influence of parents’ perceptions, the influences of residential self-selectivity reasons are less uniform across household members (see Table 4). For example,
the children and the fathers of households who moved to the location because of
looking for a better neighbourhood or a larger house/flat had a higher proportion of car
use than their counterparts, whilst for the mothers of the household, they drove less.
Presumably it is because of the trade-off and decision priorities mechanism among
household members. The mothers who moved to the location because they wanted to be
closer to work or school places had a lower proportion of private car use than their
counterparts, but that is not necessarily the case for the children and the fathers.
Nevertheless, all household members who belong to the groups who moved to the
location because of looking for a better public transport service had a lower car use and
higher participation in public transport use and walking than households who moved to
the location because of any other reasons.
    Overall, the descriptive descriptions on Tables 3 and 4 show that parents’ perceptions
and household’s residential self-selectivity behaviours play important roles in influencing
parents’ and children’s daily travel mode shares. However, at the same time, these
effects and modal shares are also the result of interactions between household members’
travel patterns, constraints and commitments. It is important to detangle these complex
interactions to really understand which decisions or perceptions influence particular
behaviours and which ones are influencing other behaviours. This would help us to
design and target a policy effective in promoting more physically active modes among
children. This complexity is addressed in the next following section which analyses the
influence of parents’ perceptions and their activity-travel constraints on their children
travel mode choice under one integrated decision structure.
The proposed model structure
To analyse the complex interactions between parents’ and children travel choices, perceptions and residential self-selectivity, this study introduces a model structure that
represents relationships between the parents’ travel patterns, their perceptions on the
existing public transport and infrastructure conditions and their reported residential self-selectivity reasons with the children travel mode shares.
    In composing and estimating a complex model structure as mentioned above, several
analysis methodologies can be applied. One of the most advanced approaches in
modelling individual choices is a hybrid choice model (e.g. Walker 2001; Ben-Akiva
et al. 2002) which has a capability in incorporating latent variables in the analyses.
However, the analyses in this paper are involving several discrete choice outcomes and
a considerable number of endogenous relationships. Thus, it is still computationally
difficult. Since the goal of this study is to reveal the complex relationship between
parents’ and children’s travel variables, but not forecasting, structural equations modelling (SEM) is considered sufficient and is applied where all travel variables are
modelled as linear equations. SEM is a powerful method for analysis of multiple
simultaneous causal relationships among endogenous variables and between endogenous
and exogenous variables (Golob 2003; De Abreu e Silva et al. 2012). Compared to
hybrid choice models, SEM has the advantage of being able to consider a fairly large
number of endogeneity relationships as well as latent variables, although loses precision
due to the assumption of linear equations.
    The model structure proposed in this study can be seen on Fig. 1 below. Indeed, trends,
social norms and peers’ influence should also play a role in individual decision making
processes and mode shares (e.g. Eriksson et al. 2013). However, due to the data limitation,
these factors cannot be included here. In this study a child is defined as an individual who
is less than 15 years old. For the sake of simplicity, in this paper, each child within a
household is estimated separately. Combining the patterns between children within the
same household would be the next step of this study.
    Therefore, assuming: H is the vector of variables representing the household residential location, such as built environment density, and accessibility to public transport
and basic amenities, P is the vector of parent’s socio-demographic attributes, and K is
the vector of children’s socio-demographic attributes, and R is the parents’ perception
and households’ reported residential self-selectivity reasons, F is the latent variables
associated with parents’ perception and households’ reported residential self-selectivity
reasons and let P1nt is the total number of father’s daily trips, P2nt is the total number of
mother’s daily trips, P1tt is the father’s total travel time (in min), P2tt is the mother’s
total travel time (in min), Cnt is the number of children’s daily trips, Ctt is the children’s
total travel time (in min), P1nm is the proportion of father’s non-motorised trips, P1pv is
the proportion of father’s private car trips, P2nm is the proportion of mother’s non-
motorised trips, P2pv is the proportion of mother’s private car trips, Catm is the proportion
of children’s walking and cycling trips, and Cptm is the proportion of children’s public
transport trips.
     Then the model system on Fig. 1 may be formulated in general form as follows:
   It is assumed in this model system that parents’ daily trip parameters, like the total
number of trips, Pint, and total travel time, Pitt, act as explanatory variables that influences
the share of parents’ walking and cycling trips, Pinm, and private car trips, Pipv, which
together with children’s number of trips, Cnt, and their total travel time, Ctt, will influence
the proportions of children walking and cycling trips, Catm, and their public transport use,
Cptm. Meanwhile, children’s number of trips, Cnt, and travel time, Ctt, are influencing
parents’ number of trips, Pint, and travel time, Pitt, to reflect the parents’ travel burdens that
are imposed by children’s travel needs. All of these mode share variables are also influenced by the latent variables, F, that reflect parents’ perception of the quality of cycling
and public transport service and reported households’ residential self-selection behaviours.
   The latent variables are measure by ten questions that are related to parents’ satisfactions on the quality of cycling and public transport service and parents’ residential self-
selection. Three latent variables were extracted through an exploratory factor analysis. Five
variables that represent parents’ perceptions of and satisfactions with transport infrastructure and public transport services are associated with one latent variable, while three
residential self-selectivity variables (‘‘Move to location because looking a better neighbourhood’’, ‘‘Move to location because of looking for a larger/better house/flat’’, ‘‘Move to
location because want to live closer to work or school’’) are associated with a latent
variable that represents the residential self-selectivity for better built environment. The
other two residential self-selectivity variables (‘‘The household moved to the neighbourhood because of looking for a better public transport service’’, ‘‘The household moved to
the neighbourhood because they want to be closer to shops and leisure facilities’’) are
associated with a latent variable that represents the residential self-selectivity for better
accessibility. It is also assumed in this model structure that the fathers’ private car use
behaviour will influence the mothers’ private car use and vice versa. Thus, the SEM
function that used can be defined as:
where B is p 9 p matrix of coefficients, represent the direct effects of endogenous variables on other endogenous variables. Whilst, U is p 9 q matrix coefficients, represent the
direct effect of exogenous variables. Then, y is p 9 1 vector of endogenous variables, x is
p 9 1 vector of exogenous variables and f is p 9 1 vector errors in the equations with
standard assumption that f is uncorrelated with x. Since the data contains multiday
observations from a given household, a sub dataset was drawn from the full dataset such
that only one observation was randomly drawn from the observations of the given
household, and the sub dataset was used for the SEM estimation.
The estimated model results
The estimation results can be seen at Table 5 below. It is also shown that the model has a
good fit. The v2/df = 3.81, The RMSEA is 0.023 and the GFI is 0.988. The final value of
discrepancy function is 0.310 while the independent model is 8.173. The reference variables used in this analysis are: female, parents who are younger than 20 years old and older
than 60 years old, part-timer and unemployed parents, parents who do not have driving
license, children who are younger than 5 years old, low income households (which the
annual income less than 25,000 GBP), urban areas in which the population is less than
10,000 people and parents and households whose preferences and residential self-selectivity reasons. An explanatory variable would be considered to significantly associate with
the dependent variable at a = 10 % if the absolute t-statistic value (shown on the bracket
of Table 5) equals or is larger than 1.64. The magnitude and direction of influence (e.g.
positively/negatively influence the dependent variable) are shown by the value and sign of
the coefficient estimates. For example, on Table 5, the estimated coefficient for the latent
variable: parents ‘Satisfaction of public transport and cycling facilities’ variable to the
proportion of father using non-motorised mode (Catm) is 0.235, with t stats = 3.73. This
means that the latent factor that represents the parents’ satisfaction of public transport and
cycling facilities is significantly and positively correlated with the proportion of father
using non-motorised modes. More detailed discussions of the estimation results are
described below.
The interactions of travel patterns between parents
The model results show that fathers’ number of trips peaks when fathers are 50–59 years
old. The differences between age groups, however, are insignificant when it comes to
mothers. Both parents who work full time make a significantly smaller number of trips than
their counterparts. Interestingly whereas fathers who are full-time workers also spend more
time in travelling, and mothers who are working full-time spent more travel time than their
counterparts but the magnitude is much less than that of the fathers. Presumably this is
because mothers may have tighter time constraints in doing out-of-home activity than
fathers (Susilo and Avineri 2014).
   As expected, both parents who have access to private car made more trips than others
and the more trips they make the higher the proportion of their private car use. Furthermore, both fathers and mothers who have the access to the private car spend longer travel
time than others; whereas the magnitude is much less for mothers compared to fathers.
   The model shows a positive correlation between the proportions of car use of fathers
with mothers and vice versa, which indicates the habit of using private car of one of the
adult household members is positively correlated with the habit of using of private car by
another adult member within the household.
   The model results also indicate that parents’ numbers of trips are negatively influenced by children’s numbers of trips. The magnitudes of such influences are more
significant on mothers than on fathers. Meanwhile, parents’ total travel time is not
significantly influenced by children’s total travel time. These indicate significant travel
burdens introduced from children, mainly the children accompany trips, especially for
mothers.
The children travel patterns
In line with some previous studies (e.g. Buliung et al. 2009; Susilo and Waygood 2012),
older children make fewer number of trips compared to smaller children, whilst the
teenagers (11–15 years old) spend significantly more time to travel than their younger
counterparts. The presence of siblings reduces children’s number of trips significantly as
well as the travel time, whereas the bicycle availability decreases the number of trips and
total travel time spent.
    As hypothesised earlier in the paper, the more mothers’ choosing non-motorised modes
in travelling, the higher the proportion of children to use non-motorised mode - and it is the
most significant variables that positively correlated with the proportion of the children non-motorised modes. However, the fathers’ choosing non-motorised modes in travelling does
not significantly influence children’s use of non-motorised mode. At the same time, the
more mothers driving, the less children would use public transport. This is in-line with a
hypothesis that was outlined by Mackett et al. (2005) and Næss (2006). The model estimation results also show that the correlation of the mothers’ car use proportion is much
more apparent than fathers’ in reducing the children public transport use and non-motorised use.
Household income and degree of urbanisation
As expected, mothers who belong to higher income households have a higher proportion of
car use and a lower proportion of walking and cycling participation than others, while
surprisingly fathers who belong to higher income households do not have a significant
increase of car use but they have a lower slow mode share. No significant mode share
differences are found between children from households of different income levels.
    In general, the parents who live in more urbanised areas tend to have a lower proportion
of car use than the ones who live in lower density areas, which is in-line with previous
studies (e.g. Ewing and Cervero 2010; Susilo and Maat 2007). But interestingly the clear
relationship between car use and degree of urbanisation is not followed by a clear relationship with corresponding non-motorised trip participation. Although the parents who
live in urban areas with residences between 250,000 and 10,000 are walking and cycling
significantly more than the ones who live in the rural areas with residences fewer than
10,000, the differences in the participation rate between more urbanized cities are less
apparent.
    Children’s public transport use and slow mode shares are surprisingly not correlated
with urbanization level. One possible explanation could be that such influence is absorbed
by the influence of parents’ travel on the children’s travel mode choices which are
explicitly modelled. On the other hand, the children who live in medium cities with
residences between 250,000 and 25,000 have a higher proportion of walking and cycling
than the ones who live in bigger metropolitan areas, including London. Presumably this is
not solely because of the degree of urbanisation of the city but also because public
transport service that is less available in smaller cities in the UK.
The effect of accessibility and transit supply on household members’ travel mode
choices
Children from households who can reach basic amenities, as expected have higher share of
walking and cycling in their daily travel. However, parents’ travel mode choices are not
influenced by living close to basic amenities. For households which can reach nearest bus
stop within 30 min, the mothers tend to have a higher public transport travel share and the
fathers tend to have a lower car travel share. Presumably, this is because parents use public
transport more often, thus have more walk trips to the bus stop. However, their children’s
travel mode choices are not significantly affected, indicating a trend of less often using bus
in children’s travel in UK.
Parents’ satisfactions and residential self-selectivity influencing household members’
travel mode choice
The influences of latent variables representing the residential self-selectivity and self-satisfaction on the mode shares of household members are summarised in Table 6. The
latent variable that represents satisfaction of public transport and cycling facilities (F3) is
positively correlated with parents’ proportion of walking and cycling participations while
negatively correlated with parents’ private car use. Such effects are more substantial for
fathers than for mothers. However, it shows no significant correlation to children’s mode
choices. Since the actual transit supply is controlled by another exogenous variable, ‘‘The
household members know the location of bus stops and they can be reached within 30 min
walk’’, the positive correlation between the satisfaction latent variable and parents’ public
transport use reveals that parents use public transport not only because the satisfaction
reflects the true transit supply but also because of the higher quality level of the public
transport facilities.
    The latent variable that represents residential self-selectivity for better built environment is positively correlated with mothers’ and children’s proportion of walking and
cycling participations but negatively correlated with mother’s proportion of car use.
However, it has no significant influence on fathers’ mode choices. Surprisingly, the latent
variable that represents residential self-selectivity for better accessibility shows no significant correlations with parents’ proportion of private car use and walking and cycling
participations. However, a good perception of accessibility encourages children’s proportion of walking and cycling participations.
    These correlation relationships show that in influencing parents’ travel mode choice,
satisfaction of public transport and cycling facilities plays more important role than residential self-selectivity. Correspondingly residential self-selectivity has a stronger influence
on children’s mode choice than satisfaction of public transport and cycling facilities.
Relationship between observed satisfaction and residential self-selectivity questions
and latent satisfaction and residential self-selectivity factors
From the measurement part, the statement that ‘‘The household moved to the neighbourhood because of looking for a larger/better house/flat’’ has the strongest influence on the
latent variable that represents residential self-selectivity for better built environment, while
‘‘the household moved to the neighbourhood to be closer to work or school’’ contributes
the least to the latent variable that represents residential self-selectivity for better built
environment. The statement that ‘‘The household moved to the neighbourhood because
they want to be closer to shops and leisure facilities’’ plays more important role in
affecting residential self-selectivity for better accessibility than the statement that ‘‘the
household moved to the neighbourhood because of looking for a better public transport
service’’. This indicates ‘‘close to basic amenities’’ is more common and important than
‘‘close to public transport supply’’ as a reason of moving.
    Among the satisfaction variables, the parents’ satisfaction on bus services is more
important than the parents’ satisfaction on cycling and rail and other public transport
services. This indicates bus service is more concerned and perceived by parents than other
public transport modes and cycling.
Conclusions
Using data from the UK National Travel Survey (NTS) 2002/2006, this paper explores the
influence of households’ residential self-selectivity reasons, parents’ perceptions and their
travel patterns on their children daily travel mode share. The results show that, besides
parents’ daily activity-travel engagements, household residential self-selectivity reasons
play significant roles in shaping children’s daily travel mode shares. The influences of
parents’ perceptions and households’ residential self-selectivity are not uniform across
household members. This study has revealed some trade-off activities and travel implications between parents and what matters for different parents’ roles. Further, it is also
shows that residential self-selectivity has more correlations with children’s non-motorised
mode shares than parents’, while parents’ perception and satisfaction on transport infrastructure and public transport service qualities play more significant roles on parents’ travel
mode shares than children’s.
    Overall, the results highlight the importance of policies and interventions that are
targeting and involving parents in promoting active travel among children, especially the
mother. It is important for the parents to set the example for their children even from a
young age as the results show that children are imitating parents’ behaviours, including
their daily mode choice. At the same time, different infrastructure and public transport
service characteristics have different influences to the parents’ travel mode shares. For
example, the satisfaction on transport infrastructure and public transport service qualities
has a stronger influence on fathers’ travel mode choices than mothers’. Although the results
confirm the hypothesis that the parents’ non-motorised modes use in travelling is highly
correlated with the children’s daily travel mode shares, at the same time, the results also
show that the influence of mothers’ car use proportion to the children travel mode shares is
more apparent than fathers’.
   Furthermore, the result indicates that ‘‘close to basic amenities’’ is more common and
important than ‘‘close to public transport supply’’ as for a household to choose their
residential areas. This highlights the importance of promoting a better mixed sustainable
neighbourhood, with a good quality of house and good amenities access, as/more than
providing them accessible public transport stops. The most common housing removal
reasons, moving to the location because of looking a larger/better house/flat and/or moving
for a better neighbourhood for being closer to shops and leisure facilities, are the most
important variables that associated with the households’ residential self-selectivity factors
which contribute to the children’s slow mode share.
   A concrete example of plausible direct policy implication of this study is re-targeting
the policies which aim to promote active travel among children towards parents, especially
the mother. So far, most of the previous policies that were aimed to promote walking and
cycling among children were focused on the school and the children themselves. The
results reveal that one of the critical keys which tend to be left aside is the role of the
parents, especially the mother, which is supported with Japanese case study which was laid
by Waygood (2009). And both parents’ attitudes towards slow modes are influenced by
public transport and the build environment qualities within the neighbourhood. This, again,
highlights the importance of a well-designed neighbourhood in influencing the children
travel modes, directly and indirectly.
   It is important to note here some caveats that may relevant in interpreting the study’s
results. The analysis was executed based on one observation which was randomly drawn
from the 7-day observations of the given household. Thus, there will be some variability of
behaviour interactions between parents and children across different days. Moreover, it is
likely that during the survey period, both household’s attitudes and small children’s travel
diaries were reported by the same parent. Thus, it would not be a surprise if there were
correlations between parents’ perceptions and the children’s travel mode share, as parents
responses would be proxies for their children’s assumed responses. Furthermore, for the
sake of simplicity, in this paper, each child within a household is estimated separately,
which is in reality, the travel that was generated by a child may impose a constraint to
another child. Nevertheless, this would be one of plausible future directions of our study.
Additionally, this study is based on data from 2002 to 2006, and since then sociodemographic characteristics of the society and the urban structure have been continuously
changing and so has the behaviour of the population. Recently there has been a sign of
‘peak car’ phenomenon (e.g. Metz 2013) and emerging Y-generation’s unique mobility
patterns (e.g. IFMO 2013) in various developed countries, where the younger generation
consciously starts to prioritise other travel modes than private car. The impacts of this
constitute another of the possible the future directions of this study. Lastly, this study is
based on cross-sectional datasets at national level. It is difficult to use such datasets to
reveal the real reasons underlying the interactions between households’ activity-travel
parameters. A deeper investigation with travel diaries, mixed with interviews with parents
and children, would further reveal the reasons and intra-household trade-off mechanisms
that underlie the whole decision making processes. This would form another possible
future direction of this research.