Children’s travel to school: satisfaction, current mood,
and cognitive performance

Abstract We investigate whether travel mode, travel time, and activities during travel
influence children’s satisfaction with their travel to school, their current mood, and their
cognitive performance after arriving at school. A sample of 344 children (165 girls)
between the ages of 10 and 15 years were recruited at five public schools in Va¨rmland
County, Sweden. Directly after arriving at school, the children rated how they felt on two
scales ranging from very sad to very happy and from very tired to very alert, filled out the
Satisfaction with Travel Scale adapted for children (STS-C), reported details about their
journeys, and took a word-fluency test. The results for STS-C showed that traveling by
school bus and walking or cycling was experienced as having a higher quality than traveling by car. Children who engaged in conversation during their journeys reported a higher
quality and more positive feelings than children who were engaged in solitary activities
during their journeys. A shorter journey was experienced as having a higher quality and
resulting in more positive feelings. Children traveling for longer durations performed better
in the word-fluency test if using their smartphones or doing a combination of activities
during their journeys.

Introduction
Today children make more journeys by car than they did only 10–15 years ago, and many
of the journeys that were previously made on foot or on a bike (referred to as active modes)
are now made by car (McDonald 2005; McMillan 2007). Research shows that the
prevalence of impaired metabolic health, impaired cardio-respiratory fitness, obesity, and
asthma are all symptoms of an inactive life style, toward which motorized travel contributes (Cooper et al. 2006; Roth et al. 2012; Østergaard et al. 2012). The younger
segment of the population is particularly susceptible to these negative health impacts
(Nishimura et al. 2013).
    The majority of research on children’s daily travel focuses on the increased reliance on
cars and the consequences of this for the environment and physical health (Davison et al.
2008; McDonald et al. 2015; Merom et al. 2005). Children’s satisfaction with their travel, and
their experience of it, has so far received little attention in research. By interviewing primary
school children, Barker (2009) found that car journeys allow multiple activities including
relaxation, homework, and use of commodities, in addition to providing a space suitable for
social interaction with family members. In studying British children between the ages of 12
and 18, Jones et al. (2012) found that traveling by bus provide a sense of independence, an
opportunity to socialize with friends, and an opportunity to be active by having to walk to and
from bus stops. A study we conducted revealed that the travel to school is the most frequent
journey that school children make on a daily basis, yet it is the journey that elicits the lowest
degrees of alertness and pleasure (i.e. current mood) (Westman et al. 2013). In the present
study we extend this previous study by providing more detailed information about why school
children experience travel to school less positively. We investigate effects of travel mode,
travel time, and activities during travel by measuring satisfaction with travel, current mood,
and cognitive performance after arriving at school. We also investigate whether these effects
vary with the children’s sex and age.
    In studies of adults, it has been found that characteristics of a journey affect the travel
experience. A short work commute (10–20 min) leads to more satisfaction than a long
work commute (more than 30 min) (Olsson et al. 2013; Wachs et al. 1993; Young and
Morris 1981). Satisfaction with travel is also dependent on activities during travel (Ettema
et al. 2012; Mokhtarian and Salomon 2001). Engaging in conversation increases satisfaction by counteracting boredom, while reading and resting elicit relaxation that decrease
satisfaction, and the use of smartphones increases satisfaction by filling downtime (Wang
et al. 2014). Cycling leads to more satisfaction than traveling by car or bus (Olsson et al.
2013), and bus leads to less satisfaction than traveling by car. In the present study, we
investigate whether travel time, travel mode, and activities during travel affect children’s
satisfaction with their school journeys in the same way that they have been found to affect
adults’ satisfaction with their work commute.
    Current mood is defined as how people feel at the moment (Diener and Lucas 2000). It
varies in the two orthogonal dimensions of valence ranging from negative to positive
through neutral, and activation (or arousal) ranging from deactivation to activation through
neutral (see Fig. 1; Posner et al. 2009; Russell 1980; Yik et al. 1999). Current mood has
been shown to be affected by age and sex (Kirmil-Gray et al. 1984; Larson and Richards
2000; Larson et al. 2002), by internal events (e.g., bodily changes, ruminations or mental
contents) (Russell 2003), and by emotions elicited by external events such as travel (Olsson
et al. 2013). In our previous study (Westman et al. 2013), we found that children who travel
to school using an active mode are in a more positive mood when arriving at school and
during their school day than children who travel by motorized transportation. In the present
study we want to also determine how travel time and travel mode affect current mood
immediately upon arriving at school in the morning and later on in the afternoon.
    Marti´nez-Go´mez et al. (2011) found that girls who commute to school using an active
mode have approximately 4 % higher school grades than girls who travel by motorized
transportation. This may be explained by the beneficial effects of physical activity on
cognitive performance (Ruiz et al. 2010; Trudeau and Shephard 2008). Since we wanted to
investigate whether the travel itself affects performance, a cognitive performance test was
conducted directly after arriving at school. Such a test will be more sensitive to capture
performance effects than children’s overall school grades, which depend on many other
factors throughout the school year. If cognitive performance is shown to be affected by
traveling to school, then it is possible that performance attributable to school travel will be
one factor contributing toward school grades. Based on research on adults showing that
commute-induced stress increases with travel time (Van Rooy 2006) and that longer
commutes result in poorer proofreading performance and higher of perceived commuter
stress (Evans and Wener 2006), we will investigate whether longer travel times impair the
children’s cognitive performance. We also want to investigate whether an active travel
mode improves their cognitive performance.
    In summary, the aim of the present study is to investigate how children in different ages
and of different sexes are influenced by travel to school. Specifically, we attempt to show
influences of travel mode, travel time, and activities during travel on the children’s satisfaction with their travel to school, their mood immediately after arriving in the morning
and later in the afternoon, and their cognitive performance at school after arriving.
Method
Setting
Five schools were selected such that sufficient variation was achieved in travel distance to
these schools and in accessibility to travel modes. The school principals were contacted
and approved of the study.
    The schools are located in Va¨rmland County in southwest Sweden. The county has
approximately 273,000 residents. One school is located in Karlstad municipality
(population approx. 84,000, geographic area 1167 km2), two schools in Arvika municipality (population approx. 26,000, geographic area 1659 km2), and two schools in Torsby
municipality (population approx. 12,700, geographic area 4187 km2). The schools differ in
their numbers of pupils (Karlstad having 450, Arvika 420 and 230, and Torsby 400 and 35)
and in how far they are located from their pupils’ homes (median distance in Karlstad
being 2.5 km, in Arvika 2 km, and in Torsby 4.5 km). The shortest distance for the
municipality to provide free school bus service is in Karlstad 4 km (grades 4–9), in Arvika
2 km (grades 4–6) and 5 km (grades 7–9), and in Torsby 3 km (grades 4–5) and 4 km
(grades 6–9). Exceptions to these rules are made for children with disabilities, or for
children living close to routes with high volumes of traffic.
Participants
Children in grades 4 (aged 10–11), 6 (aged 12–13), and 8 (aged 14–15) were invited to
participate. Letters were sent to their parents containing written information about the
study and a consent form to sign and return. Since information by mail was insufficient to
obtain the required consent from everyone, a research assistant contacted the non-responding households by phone. Only three parents refused to let their child participate.
Data were obtained for 345 children (47.8 % girls), 97 in grade 4, 147 in grade 6, and 101
in grade 8. For 25 % of the children, at least one parent had a university degree, with
monthly net household income being approximately SEK 45,000. All had access to at least
one car. These statistics conform to the country statistics (Statistics Sweden 2016).
Procedure
The data collection period lasted from December 2012 to March 2013, with outside
temperatures of approximately ?1 to -20 °C (34 to -4 °F) and a snow cover from a few
centimeters to a few decimeters.
    In each class immediately before the first morning lesson on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, or
Thursdays, a research assistant distributed questionnaires to be filled out by the children in
their classrooms. In the first part of the questionnaire the children rated their current mood
on two five-point rating scales, one ranging from very sad (1) to very glad (5) (valence) and
the other ranging from very sleepy (1) to very alert (5) (activation). Current mood was once
again rated in the afternoon on the same two scales. In the morning, questions were asked
about what travel mode had been used to get to school (walking, cycling [inline skates and
scooters included], car, school bus, public transport, or other), the duration of the travel
(\5 min, 5–15 min, 16–30 min, 31–45 min, [45 min), whether traveling to school was
made alone or in the company of others, and the activities the children engaged in while
traveling (looking out of the window, listening to music/radio, using a smartphone,
sleeping/resting, reading/doing homework, talking with friends/family, doing nothing). In
the subsequent analyses the travel mode was coded as car, active mode, and school bus. A
small number of journeys (18) were made by public transport and were included in the
school bus category. Cycling and walking were included in the active mode category.
Travel time was coded as being equal to or less than 15 min versus more than 15 min.
Activities were coded in four categories, solitary activities (looking out of the window,
listening to music/radio, sleeping/resting, reading/doing homework, doing nothing), using
a smartphone, social activities (talking to others), or combinations of activities. The first
category (solitary activities) differed from the second (social activities) in that the latter
always includes a friend or family member. The third category (using a smartphone) was
considered to be both solitary and social since the smartphone usage of children and young
people often entails social networking (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, ClubPenguin, or Habbo
Hotel). Some children did several activities while traveling. Since we did not know which
the main activity was, these are included in the separate category with combinations of
activities.
   Finally, questions were asked about satisfaction with travel to school. An adapted
version of the Satisfaction with Travel Scale (STS, see Friman et al. 2013) was used. The
STS consists of nine rating scales that are aggregated to one cognitive (overall quality
evaluation) and two affective evaluation indices. Based on a pilot study some of the
adjective pairs defining the rating scales were slightly altered to adapt them to the children’s vocabulary. The scale is henceforth referred to as STS-Children (STS-C). The three
numerical five-point rating scales (1–5) assessing the cognitive quality evaluation (STS-C/
CE) had endpoints defined by the following adjective pairs, translated from Swedish: (the
journey) worked very poorly–worked very well, (the journey was) really useless–really
excellent, and (the journey was the) worst imaginable–best imaginable. Two orthogonal
affect dimensions were also assessed using the STS derived from the affect circumplex
(see Fig. 1). Three scales assessing positive activation/negative deactivation (STS-C/
PAND) had endpoints defined by the following adjective pairs: (during my journey, I felt)
very bored-very interested, very spiritless–very excited, and very tired–very alert. Another
three scales assessing positive deactivation/negative activation (STS-C/PDNA) had end-points defined by the adjective pairs: (during my journey, I felt) very stressed–very calm,
very worried–very carefree, very hurried–very relaxed. The three STS-C indices were
calculated by averaging the scale ratings.
   Directly after having answered the questionnaire a word-fluency test1 was administered.
The children were requested to write down on a blank sheet of paper as many words as
possible in 1 min. All the words had to begin with the letter F as announced by the research
assistant when the test started. The instructions read as follows: ‘‘Write as many words as
you can think of that begin with a letter of the alphabet that I will tell you. You do not have
to worry about spelling or grammar. You will have 1 min to write the words, and I will tell
you when to stop’’. In scoring the performance, the words that were counted were either
found in a Swedish dictionary, were well-known slang words or names. Words were
deleted from the analyses if they could not be interpreted or read, or if they were repetitions. The total counted words was used in the analyses.
Results
Overview
In the Appendix Tables 5, 6 and 7, means and standard deviations are for girls and boys in
each grade presented of the dependent variables satisfaction with travel, current mood, and
cognitive performance related to travel mode, travel time, and activity during travel. Cross-tabulations showed that travel mode was not strongly related to travel time (/ = .53,
p \ .001) or to activity during travel (/ = .34), and that travel time was weakly related to
activity during travel (/ = .20). Furthermore, preliminary analyses of variance (ANOVAs)
on each dependent variable, including travel mode, travel time, and activity during travel,
did not reveal any significant (ps [ .05) interactions between these factors. In what
follows, we thus separately analyze the effects of each dependent variable on travel mode,
travel time, and activity during travel. Neither grade nor sex produced any significant
interaction effects (ps [ .05) with travel mode, travel time, or activities. Only significant
main effects of grade and sex are therefore reported below.
    Multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVAs) were performed on the multidimensional measures of satisfaction with travel and current mood, followed by univariate
analyses of variance (ANOVAs) or t-tests and Bonferonni-corrected post hoc t-tests. A
univariate ANOVA was conducted on the performance measure. The significance levels
were set to p \ .05.
Satisfaction with travel
Means and standard deviations are given in Table 1 for STS-C/CE, STS-C/PDNA, and
STS-C/PAND (Cronbach’s alpha = .70/.66/.75, respectively) related to sex, grade, travel
mode, travel time, and activities during travel.
    The effects of travel mode are analyzed first. Data from 15 participants were deleted.
Fourteen participants reported a combination of travel modes and one did not report a
travel mode at all. A 3 (grade: 4 vs. 6 vs. 8) by 2 (sex: boy vs. girl) by 3 (travel mode:
school bus vs. car vs. active mode)2 MANOVA yielded significant main effects of travel
mode, F(6, 592) = 3.37, p = .005, and grade, F(6, 592) = 6.17, p \ .001. In univariate
ANOVAs significant main effects were found of travel mode on STS-C/CE and of grade on
all three STS-C indices. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc t-tests showed that children who
traveled to school by car were significantly lower on STS-C/CE (M = 3.92) than those
who traveled either by school bus (M = 4.24) or by active mode (M = 4.18). Children in
grade 8 were significantly lower on STS-C/CE (M = 3.82) than children in grades 4
(M = 4.33) and 6 (M = 4.17). Children in grade 4 were significantly higher on STS-C/
PAND (M = 3.68) than children in grade 6 (M = 3.26), who were significantly higher
than children in grade 8 (M = 2.96). No grade differences for STS-C/PDNA were significant in the post hoc tests.
    A second MANOVA yielded significant main effects of travel time (less than or equal to
15 min vs. more than 15 min) on the STS-indices, F(3336) = 12.17, p \ .001. Children
traveling to school for more than 15 min reported less quality (STS-C/CE, M = 3.79 vs.
M = 4.21; t(338) = 21.51, p \ .001) and excitement (STS-C/PAND, M = 2.97 vs.
M = 3.39; t(338) = 12.05, p = .001).
    A third MANOVA yielded a significant main effect of activities during travel (solitary
activities vs. social activities vs. using a smartphone vs. combinations of activities) on the
STS-indices, F(9101) = 4.95, p \ .001. In univariate ANOVAs significant main effects of
activities were obtained on all indices, STS-C/CE, F(3338) = 7.40, p \ .001, STS-C/
PAND, F(3338) = 11.30, p \ .001, and STS-C/PDNA, F(3338) = 5.89, p = .001. Those
who engaged in social activities during travel were significantly higher on STS-C/CE
(M = 4.46) than those who engaged in solitary activities (M = 3.96), or who used a
smartphone (M = 4.02). Children who engaged in social activities were significantly
higher on STS-C/PAND (M = 3.85) than those who engaged in any other activities
(solitary activities: M = 3.02; smartphone use: M = 3.15; combination of activities:
M = 3.42). Children who engaged in social activities (M = 4.55), who used a smartphone
(M = 4.48), or who engaged in a combination of activities (M = 4.43) were significantly
higher on STS-C/PDNA than those who engaged in solitary activities (M = 4.16).
    In summary, the lowest degrees of experienced quality (as assessed by the cognitive
dimension STS-C/CE) are observed for travel by car and longer travel times, whereas a
higher experienced quality is observed for social activities during travel. Furthermore,
children engaging in social activities during travel report more excitement (STS-C/PAND)
and lower stress (STS-C/PDNA). Higher stress levels are found among those engaged in
solitary activities.
Current mood
In Table 2, means and standard deviations of the ratings of valence and activation in the
morning and afternoon are given related to sex, grade, travel mode, travel time, and
activities during travel.
    In the morning questionnaires ratings were missing for 17 children and in the afternoon
questionnaires for 39 children who did not attend class. A 3 (grade) by 2 (sex) by 3 (travel
mode) MANOVA on valence and activation in the morning and afternoon only yielded a
significant main effect of grade, F(8530) = 2.32, p = .019. In univariate ANOVAs, the
main effects of grade on all measures of valence and activation (both morning and
afternoon) were significant.
    Bonferroni-corrected post hoc t-tests showed that children in grade 8 rated valence
significantly lower both in the morning (M = 3.86) and in the afternoon (M = 3.92) than
children in grade 4 (M = 4.24 and M = 4.33, respectively) and grade 6 (M = 4.16 and
4.32, respectively). Children in grade 8 also reported lower activation in the morning
(M = 2.84) and afternoon (M = 3.32) compared to those in grade 4 (M = 3.38 and
M = 3.95, respectively).
   A second MANOVA on valence and activation in the morning and valence and activation in the afternoon yielded a significant main effect of travel time, F(4303) = 3.21,
p = .013. t-tests showed that children traveling to school for more than 15 min had lower
activation in the morning (M = 2.80) than children traveling equal to or less than 15 min
to school (M = 3.19), t(306) = 6.32, p = .012.
   A third MANOVA on valence and activation in the morning and afternoon did not yield
any significant main effect of activities during travel, F(12,912) = 1.14, p [ .05.
   In summary, the children in grade 8 experience the lowest degree of valence and
activation both in the morning and afternoon. Longer travel time leads to a lower degree of
activation in the morning.
Performance
Means and standard deviations of the performance measure (number of words produced in
the word fluency test) are given in Table 3 related sex, grade, travel mode, travel time, and
activities during travel.
   A 3 (grade) by 2 (sex) by 3 (travel mode) ANOVA only yielded main effects of grade,
F(2, 290) = 34.20, p \ .001, and sex, F(1, 290) = 35.45, p \ .001. Bonferroni-corrected
post hoc t-tests showed that performance significantly increased with grade (M = 6.83,
8.20, and 10.83) and that in all grades girls (M = 9.82) performed better than boys
(M = 7.29).
   A second ANOVA showed a significant main effect of travel time, F(1, 330) = 5.55,
p = .019. Children with longer than 15 min to school performed significantly better
(M = 9.38) than children with shorter than or equal to 15 min to school (M = 8.28).
     A third ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of activities during travel, F(3,
331) = 6.80, p \ .001. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc t-tests showed that children who
used a smartphone and were engaged in combinations of activities performed better
(M = 9.18 and 9.46, respectively) than children who engaged either in social activities
(M = 7.47) or solitary activities (M = 7.72).
     In summary, a longer travel time, using a smartphone, or doing a combination of
activities positively affects cognitive performance.
Discussion
The aim of the study was to investigate the impacts of travel mode, travel time, and
activities during travel on children of different sexes and ages when traveling to school.
We measured satisfaction with travel, current mood, and cognitive performance immediately after arriving at school in the morning, with current mood again being measured in
the afternoon. The main results to be discussed are summarized in Table 4. We also note
that our analyses yielded no significant interaction effects that otherwise would have
indicated that the impacts of travel mode, travel time, and activities during travel are
different depending on the children’s sex and grade. We therefore have no empirical basis
for concluding from our results that school travel impacts differently on children of different sexes and ages. Some studies have found sex differences on children’s travel
(Cooper et al. 2006) while some have not (Metcalf et al. 2004). Below we only comment
on significant main effects of sex and grade.
    Consistent with research on adults (Friman et al. 2013; Olsson et al. 2013), travel mode
was found to affect the children’s satisfaction with their travel. Active mode and school
bus give a higher quality than the car. One possible explanation for this is the physical
activity associated with an active mode and with walking to and from the bus stop (Olsson
et al. 2013; Westman et al. 2013). Another explanation is that the school bus and the active
mode involve desirable social interactions. Children like meeting and talking to their
friends (Jones et al. 2012). In support of this, we found that engagement in social activities
during travel resulted in higher quality than engagement in solitary activities or smartphone
use. Moreover, those children who engaged in social activities experienced more excitement than those who engaged in other activities. Engaging in solitary activities resulted in
more stress and worry. Thus, being sociable and interacting with friends and acquaintances
seem to be enjoyable activities that the school journey may facilitate. The use of a
smartphone may only be a way of counteracting boredom. That an active travel mode or
social activities did not affect activation of current mood (p = .28) was however unexpected. A reason may be that the study was performed in the middle of the winter when the
sun does not rise before school starts and darkness has been shown to negatively affect
children’s alertness (Swedo et al. 1995).
    Lower quality and excitement were reported by children with a longer duration of
travel. The older children similarly experienced the lowest quality and excitement. Current
mood immediately after travel was also affected by travel time, with children who traveled
longer reporting lower activation. A longer trip may have this kind of effect on current
mood, but the children with a longer distance to school also started traveling earlier in the
morning, which may add to their low activation. The older children reported lower valence
and activation, both in the morning and afternoon. These results are consistent with adolescence being a period of flux, when previously satisfied youngsters tend to become
dissatisfied (Larson et al. 2002; Pipher 1994) with less frequencies of positive emotions
(Larson and Richards 2000). Also, adolescents report being tired almost every morning
during school weeks (Tynja¨la¨ et al. 1993).
    Travel time had an effect on cognitive performance, with children who traveled for
longer producing significantly more words. We expected instead that a longer journey,
leading to lower activation of current mood, would impair cognitive performance. However, the correlation between cognitive performance and activation was only r = .07.
Marti´nez-Go´mez et al. (2011) found that children with more than 15 min of active commuting to school produced higher scores in cognitive performance tests than children who
spent less time actively commuting. In our study 4.5 % of the children with a longer travel
time used active mode compared to 32.0 % of those with a shorter travel time. Therefore,
longer active travel does not explain our results. It is still possible that a longer travel time
allows children to engage in the types of activities, for instance using a smartphone and
doing a combination of activities, which improve performance.
    Activities during travel affected cognitive performance positively in that the use of a
smartphone, or doing a combination of activities, resulted in better cognitive performance.
Studies have found that the use of ICTs (e.g. playing interactive games) is strongly related
to multiple dimensions of creativity (Jackson et al. 2012) and to visual-spatial skills (Green
and Bavelier 2003, 2006, 2007) and also believed to be important for success in mathematics, engineering, and science (Subrahmanyam et al. 2006). Shifting attention by means
of multiple combinations of activities (or smartphone use) may be an indicator of cognitive
flexibility, which is linked with some measurements of intelligence (Colzato et al. 2006).
Limitations and future research
The most important limitation of the study is that our inferences concerning the effects of
travel to school may lack internal validity because it was not possible to randomize with
regard to travel mode, travel time, and engagement in activities. It is thus not possible to
conclusively conclude that the effects we observe are caused by the travel to school. Future
research would need to either capitalize on natural experiments or try to set up randomized
experiments. It would, for instance, be possible to do an experimental study if a new school
bus service is started. Yet, such field experiments aimed at increasing internal validity may
also reduce generalizability.
    Another limitation of the study is that all measures were made retrospectively. It may in
future research (see Carrel et al. 2016) be possible to make observations and measurements
during actual travel, at least on public school buses.
Concluding remarks
Car travel to school is an environmentally unsustainable travel mode which impairs
children’s physical activity, social interactions, and possibilities of exploring their local
environment (Cooper et al. 2006; O’Brien et al. 2000; Roth et al. 2012). It also has negative
effects on travel experience and residual mood (Westman et al. 2013). In contrast, school
buses are sites of valued socialization (Jones et al. 2012) and the positive travel experience
may lead to a more positive attitude towards public transportation which will transfer to
future travel mode choice (Friman et al. 2001).
    Parents and school teachers need to be made aware of the positive effects of school
journeys on children. This understanding can be used to motivate them to reduce their car
use and changing their perceptions of their children’s travel behavior, in addition to
influencing them to promote choices of active commuting and school bus.