
School Bus Transportation
School bus transportation of students of the Northeastern Catholic District School Board is
managed by North East Tri-Board Student Transportation. This Tri-Board initiative to bring school
bus service to the school districts of Cochrane and Timiskaming is a partnership formed by the
following school boards:
         Northeastern Catholic District School Board
         District School Board Ontario North East
         Conseil scolaire public du Nord-Est de l'Ontario
Media Release: Bus Service Providers Awarded Contracts
  North East Tri-Board Student Transportation has secured a new <U+FB01>ve-year contract to provide
  busing services to three school boards in the districts of Cochrane and Timiskaming. The
  contracts were awarded through a two-stage procurement pilot project with the Ministry of
  Education.
  Download the full media release
Why a partnership with North East Tri-Board Student
Transportation?                                                                                                                      
  At the North East Tri-Board Student Transportation, we are committed to providing a safe and                        Take a moment to visit the North East Tri-Board Student
  e<U+FB03>cient transportation system to the school districts of Cochrane and Timiskaming. Tri-Board                      Transportation website for more information on school bus
  Student Transportation is continually monitoring and reviewing our transportation system for                   transportation in the Northeastern Catholic District School Board.
  safety, route e<U+FB03>ciencies and adherence to Board policies.
  You can access North East Tri-Board Student Transportation by visiting their website at
  www.netribus.ca or by calling 1-800-381-7280 in the Timmins, Cochrane, Iroquois Falls,
  Kapuskasing and Hearst areas, and at 1-800-461-8759 in the Temiskaming Shores and Kirkland Lake areas.
  The Tri-Board Student Transportation website features the following:
           Notice of School Bus Cancellations
           School Bus Eligibility using the GeoQuery Information System
           Information on Walking Distances
           Joint Transportation Policy & Procedures
           Inclement Weather Procedures for Cancellation of School Buses
           Safety Tips and Frequently Asked Questions
Is my child eligible for school bus transportation?
  If you are wondering if your child is eligible for school bus transportation, this information can now be found online. North East Tri-Board Student Transportation subscribes to
  the GeoQuery Information Service for providing school bus transportation information. The GeoQuery website provides school information, will help you determine the school
  your child should attend, and to see if they are eligible for a bus school.
