Transportation
Due to some unexpected changes in student numbers and transportation staf ng our transportation
consortium, which provides busing to all four local school boards, has been required to make some last
minute changes to its busing plans for the beginning of school.
This means that there could potentially be changes to your child’s school busing service, including
routes, schedules and to any seating assignments that may have already been communicated. We
expect that some buses may be running late, so please be patient tomorrow morning.
The consortium is doing its best to avoid cancelling routes and making signi cant changes, but for the
interim, we would strongly suggest that you check the consortium’s web site every morning before
taking your child to the bus stop to ensure that there have not been any interruptions to your service.
The consortium’s website can be found at buskids.ca
Any bus cancellations will be posted on the main page of the website, but parents should also log in to
their mybusinformation account on buskids.ca on a regular basis to verify if their bus numbers, routes
or schedules may have changed.
In conclusion, we apologize for any inconvenience this may cause. We appreciate your ongoing
patience and understanding as we navigate our way through this situation.
Return to School Transportation Protocols
Windsor-Essex Transportation Services, which provides busing to all four local school boards, has
  nalized its protocols for returning to school. You can read them here
Transit Windsor
Transit Windsor has updated its schedule to include Secondary School Extras that accommodate our
schedule. You can view the schedule here.
Please note that Transit Windsor indicates that the extras are subject to change without notice, and
may be cancelled with no advance notice due to circumstances beyond their control.
School Transportation September 2020 Opt-Out Form
Students who were eligible for transportation last year are not required to re-register for the bus. You
only need to re-apply for transportation if you have changed addresses or changed schools.
If your children are eligible for transportation but will not be riding the bus this year, we would
appreciate you lling the opt-out form which can be found at buskids.ca by scrolling down to the bus
registration section.
Transportation is administered to students in Windsor and Essex County by the Windsor Essex
Student Transportation Services (WESTS), which is a consortium formed by the Windsor-Essex
Catholic District School Board, the Greater Essex County District School Board, Conseil scolaire

     Providence and Conseil scolaire Viamonde. The consortium administers the transportation within the
     policies set by the boards with respect to eligibility, walking distance, program initiatives and
     boundaries. WESTS has established procedures to ensure that school transportation services are at all
     times reliable, safe, equitable and operating within the transportation policies that have been set by
     the each of the member boards.
     Are buses running?