Public Open Spaces, Children’s
Independent Mobility
Moushumi Chaudhury, Melody Oliver, Hannah M. Badland,
and Suzanne Mavoa
Contents
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3
   1.1     Definition of Independent Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           3
   1.2     Trends in Children’s Independent Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                    4
   1.3     Theoretical Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              6
   1.4     Active Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     9
   1.5     Associations Between Children’s Independent Mobility and Physical Activity . . .                                                                                                11
   1.6     Children’s Independent Mobility Associations with Health and
           Social Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     11
   1.7     Children’s Independent Mobility and the Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                   12
   1.8     Definition and Importance of Public Open Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                            12
   1.9     Public Open Space Use by Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             13
   1.10 How Have Public Open Spaces Been Measured? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                   14
   1.11 What Is the Relationship with Children’s Independent Mobility and Public Open
           Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
   1.12 What Is the Relationship with Public Open Space and Area-Level
            Disadvantage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 15
2 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
M. Chaudhury (*) • M. Oliver
Human Potential Centre, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
e-mail: moushumi.chaudhu@aut.ac.nz; melody.oliver@aut.ac.nz
H.M. Badland
McCaughey VicHealth Centre for Community Wellbeing Unit, Melbourne University School of
Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: hannah.badland@unimelb.edu.au
S. Mavoa
McCaughey VicHealth Centre for Community Wellbeing Unit, Melbourne University School of
Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
SHORE and Whariki Research Centre, School of Public Health, Massey University, Auckland,
New Zealand
e-mail: suzanne.mavoa@unimelb.edu.au
# Springer Science+Business Media Singapore 2014                                                                                                                                            1
B. Evans et al. (eds.), Play, Recreation, Health and Well Being, Geographies of
Children and Young People 9, DOI 10.1007/978-981-4585-96-5_17-1

2                                                                   M. Chaudhury et al.
   Abstract
   The health benefits of children engaging in at least 60 min of moderate-to-
   vigorous physical activity (MVPA) daily are well documented, including
   improved musculoskeletal health, cardiovascular risk profiles, and aerobic fit-
   ness and better psychological well-being. Many Western countries have indi-
   cated a decline in physical activity over recent decades.
      Emerging research shows that children who engage in outdoor activities and
   travel to destinations using active modes (i.e., walking, cycling) accumulate
   higher levels of physical activity than those that do not. Over recent decades,
   research interest has focused on children’s independent outdoor play and active
   travel to destinations within their neighborhood, including journeys to and from
   school without adult accompaniment.
      Engaging in independent mobility has two important benefits for children.
   Firstly, engaging in non-formalized activity practices helps children attain daily
   physical activity recommendations, which in turn, generates significant health
   benefits. Secondly, independent mobility has an important role in fostering
   children’s physical, social, emotional, cognitive, and spatial development; this
   carries into adult life.
      A growing body of evidence suggests that the use of public open spaces,
   including parks and green spaces, is associated with many health and well-being
   benefits of urban dwellers. Public open spaces are also recognized as important
   settings to promote physical activity and children’s independent mobility, not
   only because of purpose-built infrastructure (e.g., playgrounds) but also as easily
   accessible destinations for unstructured activities such as walking, cycling, and
   informal outdoor play.
      This chapter first provides an overview of children’s independent mobility
   and thereafter synthesizes the literature related to public open spaces within the
   context of children’s activity and independent mobility.
   Keywords
   Children’s independent mobility • Public open space • Neighborhoods
1        Introduction
1.1      Definition of Independent Mobility
The term independent mobility was conceptualized by Hillman and colleagues in
the early 1990s, as the freedom to move around to destinations outside the home by
active travel (e.g., walking and cycling) and engaging in outdoor play without an
accompanying adult (Hillman et al. 1990; O’Brien et al. 2000). van Vliet (1983)
described these destinations as the “fourth environment,” being the setting outside
the home, including playgrounds, and child-orientated institutions. Broadly, the
investigation of children’s independent mobility has fallen into three categories:

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                   3
studies of parental license for children’s independent mobility, accompaniment
status, and “true” independent mobility. Parental license is conceptualized as
parents allowing children the freedom to do certain activities without the presence
of an adult. Hillman et al. (1990) study devised a set of behavioral indicators related
to risks to children in the local environment. They examined the licenses and
parental proxy reports for what children were allowed to do “on their own”
including crossing roads, going to leisure places, coming home from school, and
going out after dark and also what forms of transport they were approved to use
independently by parents (i.e., walking, cycling, cycling on roads, buses). Hillman
refined this to using “six licenses” as the basis for establishing the level of
children’s independent mobility afforded, as described above. The higher the
number of parental licenses a child held, the higher the levels of children’s
independent mobility. Generally, children’s independent mobility increased as
children aged.
    Accompaniment status has been defined as a child travels, be it with a parent,
adult, sibling, peer, or alone, with “true” independent mobility considered as
situations where the child travels without any accompaniment (Hillman
et al. 1990; O’Brien et al. 2000). Although these definitions exist, Mikkelsen and
Christensen (2009) suggested a more theoretical perspective is needed to define
children’s independent mobility. They identified that children navigating environ-
ments “on their own” and “alone” described the behavior, but the concept in itself
was not defined. Their findings suggested that the concept of children’s independent
mobility should not be focused solely on the presence or absence of adults but
should be broadened to include “invisible actors,” such as peers, friends, pets, and
animals. In particular, they found Danish suburban children entertained compan-
ionship with other children to and from school, and around their neighborhood,
while mobility of rural children principally involved the family, pets, and animals.
More recently, the use of telecommunication technology such as mobile phones has
allowed parents to monitor their independently mobile children and is thus an
additional factor to consider when defining children’s independent mobility
(Mikkelsen and Christensen 2009).
    The terms “independent” and “mobile” have been interpreted in a variety of
ways in health research to describe how these relate in childhood. Mikkelsen and
Christensen (2009) argued that “independent” implies freedom of control/not
dependent (on people or things). However this definition is unclear if it intends to
focus on a power struggle between child and parent, dependence, or physical
distance between parent and child at any given time. For example, a child attending
an adult-controlled afterschool club, yet engaging in outdoor play with no direct
adult supervision during this time, is considered to be independently mobile based
on this construct. Pooley et al. (2005a) discussed how the word “mobility” can be
characterized into three levels. Level one encompassed practical functions includ-
ing those undertaken on a temporary basis such as journeys to school, shopping, and
visiting friends. Level two included everyday mobility as a social function includ-
ing interaction – allowing development of social networks, friendships, and local

4                                                                  M. Chaudhury et al.
communities. Level three incorporated mobility as a cultural function to construct
personal identity.
   It is important to note that children’s independent mobility is fundamentally a
social construct; therefore its definition will need to reflect on-going societal
changes. As shown from this literature, it is evident no precise definition of
children’s independent mobility exists, leaving it open to interpretations. In the
interest of focusing on the diversity of mobility patterns, a combination of “true
independent mobility and accompaniment by siblings and peers and active travel
behavior” will form the definition of children’s independent mobility in this
chapter. This chapter uses a blend of these concepts whereby children’s indepen-
dent mobility is defined as whether a child undertakes active travel that is unac-
companied by an adult to school or other destinations during leisure time in the
neighborhood environment.
1.2       Trends in Children’s Independent Mobility
Globally, children’s independent mobility engagement has seen a radical decline
over time (Hillman et al. 1990; Shaw et al. 2013). The seminal report by Hillman
et al. (1990), “One False Move,” investigated children’s independent mobility in
England and Germany in 1971 and 1990. The survey areas in these two countries
were deemed geographically and socially compatible in a number of ways includ-
ing residential density, range of urban and rural environments, and car ownership.
The study was revisited 39 years on in the same areas in the two countries in 2010
(Shaw et al. 2013). As mentioned earlier, Hillman’s work was based on six parental
licenses which were given to children aged between 7 and 15 years (juniors aged
7–11 years; seniors aged 11–15). In 1971, 86 % of parents of English primary
children reported their children were allowed to travel home from school alone;
however, this had declined to 35 % by 1990. By 2010, the proportion of children
allowed to independently travel home from school had reduced to 25 %. On closer
examination by age, this reduction was due to a decrease in parental license given to
7–8-year-olds to travel from home to school alone. In 1971, 80 % of parents
allowed children to travel alone to school, but by 1990 this had declined to 19 %.
In 2010 the proportion was only 6 %. In the 1971 report, German children reported
greater freedom than their English counterparts across all six licenses for indepen-
dent travel.
   O’Brien et al. (2000) replicated Hillman’s work in the Childhood, Urban Space
and Citizenship project with English primary (10–11 years of age) and secondary
(13–14 years of age) school children in the late 1990s. Compared with Hillman’s
findings in the 1990 report, this study also revealed a decrease in children’s
independent mobility. There are limitations when interpreting the results of these
three studies. The measurement of children’s independent mobility was limited to
parent report of licenses to travel to school unaccompanied, and mobility to other
destinations was not considered. The use of parental license was also a subjective,

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                              5
Fig. 1 Prevalence of independent mobility in children (% children over years 1940–2000). Notes:
Cross roads = allowed to cross roads on own, leisure mobility = independent mobility during
leisure time, public transport = allowed to use public transport on own, school trip = independent
mobility to school. (1) Hillman 1990); (2) O’Brien et al. (2000); (3) Pooley (2005b)
(Figure reprinted with permission; Badland and Oliver (2012))
proxy measure of children’s independent mobility and thus was not an assessment
of children’s actual behaviors.
    Through in-depth oral life-history interviews, Pooley et al. (2005b) compared
children’s journey to school in urban areas in England since the 1940s. For 10–11-
year-olds born in the oldest cohort (1932–1941), 40 % traveled to school alone
compared with 9 % in 10–11-year-olds born in the youngest cohort (1990–1991).
Figure 1 shows this decline in children’s independent mobility over 1940–2000.
    Similar independent mobility trends have been reported in other countries,
including Denmark, Finland, Norway, and the United Kingdom (Fyhri
et al. 2011), Italy, and Australia (Shaw et al. 2013). Interestingly, studies from
Finland and other Scandinavian countries have reported children engage in higher
levels of children’s independent mobility than children from other European coun-
tries, albeit overall decline has been observed over time (Kytta¨ 2004).
    Many of the accounts of children’s independent mobility and more recently the
concept of walkability research have come from study notions of space, and of
journeying from place to place across a number of interdisciplinary researchers
(e.g., public health, urban planners, environmental psychology, social epidemiolo-
gists), looking at distances walked and maps of spatial ranges. However little
attention has been drawn to alternative perspectives in particular from the view
point of health geographers, for example, practices of walking itself. This could

6                                                                   M. Chaudhury et al.
further contribute knowledge on movement activities, different forms of embodi-
ment, their relationship to health, and their places, experiences, agency, and
cultures involved (Christian et al. 2012). As Horton and Evans (2013) suggest,
this could be particularly important to know what happens during those distances
walked and within those mapped ranges and how such practices matter.
    Obesity/fatness is a major concern not only for public health researchers, and
globally among policy maker, but across other multidisciplinary researchers. For
example, among geographical research there is a shift in obesity policy and
understanding obesogenic environments away from an individualistic model of
obesity to a more ecological model at population level (Colls and Evans 2014).
1.3       Theoretical Framework
1.3.1 Socio-ecological Model
In determining what influences children’s independent mobility, no specific behav-
ioral model has been published that provides a theoretical framework for emerging
research in this area (Mikkelsen and Christensen 2009). One of the most common
models used in health promotion research to look at health behavior is the socio-
ecological model (Stokols 1996). The socio-ecological model developed out of
work of a number of prominent researchers (Glanz et al. 2008, pp. 468–469). The
core concept of a socio-ecological model is that behavior has multiple levels of
influences, including individual, social environment, physical environment, and
policy. Original work on the socio-ecological model stems from Bronfenbrenner’s
work on ecological systems theory in the 1970’s, which identifies five environmen-
tal systems with which an individual interacts. His work saw the influences on
behavior as a series of layers, where each layer had a resulting impact on the next
level (Bronfenbrenner 1994). All levels of the socio-ecological model impact on the
behavior of the individual (Stokols 1996). As Stokols addresses, the socio-
ecological approach integrates person-focused efforts to modify health behaviors
with environment-focused interventions. While the components remain the same,
the socio-ecological model needs to be tailored to suit particular behaviors and
population groups within each level. Figure 2 features the basic socio-ecological
model linking the individual with their social, physical, and political environments.
    In light of the lack of a theoretical framework for children’s independent
mobility, Badland and colleagues have recently developed a conceptual multilevel
framework to understand the multiple influences on the behavior (Fig. 3; Badland
et al. 2016). Figure 3 highlights the relationships within the conceptual framework,
for example, children’s independent mobility behavior may be influenced by
factors associated within the built environment, which in turn are influenced by
environmental policies and social norms, and these relationships may be
causational or bidirectional.
    The focus on children’s independent mobility by many social science
researchers, over the last three decades, has concentrated mainly within urban
neighborhood setting. Drawing conceptual-methodological frameworks from

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                               7
Fig. 2 Illustration of model
made up of the individual,
social environment, physical
                                                        Policy
environment, and policy
components
                                                      Physical
                                                    Environment
                                                        Social
                                                    Environment
                                                      Individual
transport geography and environmental psychology has afforded research exploring
children and young people’s everyday walking in diverse context including walking
routines, behavior, and patterns. Together with new terminologies and the devel-
opment of a number of techniques and technologies, researchers have contributed to
understanding children and young people’s geographies (Trapp et al. 2012).
1.3.2 Societal Changes
Over the last few decades, a number of societal changes have likely influenced
children’s independent mobility, including change in family structure, greater use
of structured childcare, increasing number of dual income and working households,
families living further away from schools and places of employment, and increased
and multiple car ownership per household (Fyhri et al. 2011). Also, parental
(O’Brien et al. 2000; Prezza et al. 2005) and children’s (Hume et al. 2005) percep-
tions of safety in neighborhood risks, including stranger danger (Rudner 2012),
outdoor play (Veitch et al. 2006; Wen et al. 2009), and increased road traffic
(Hillman et al. 1990; Zwerts et al. 2010), are contributing factors that have
influenced children’s independent mobility.
    Fyhri et al. (2011) examined datasets from national travel surveys and other
types of available data and surveys for active travel and children’s independent
mobility in the United Kingdom, Norway, Denmark, and Finland. Not all data
sources were directly comparable between the countries; however the same patterns
were found in all four countries. Data from the United Kingdom sample showed
that parental accompaniment for school travel increased among children aged 7–11
years from 78 % in 2002 to 86 % in 2008 (Department of Transport 2009). In the

                                                                                                                                                             8
   Policy and
                            Neighbourhood                   Household                   Individual                    Behaviours
 Society norms
                           BUILT ENVIRONMENT:
                             Walkability; NDAI-C;
                            streetscape; vehicular                                                               HEALTH OUTCOMES:
     RULES &                    traffic; transport                                                               Physical activity; body
 REGULATIONS:                options; play space                                                                  size; mental health
Planning policies;           attributes; area-level                                 PARENT ATTRIBUTES:
                                                                 HOME                  Culture; ethnicity;
transport policies;               disadvantage
                                                           ENVIROMENT: Car             parental licence;
 child supervision                                             ownership;
legislation; school                                                                  previous independent
                                                          cycle/scooter access;      mobility experiences;
      policies                                            technology; dwelling         sex; employment
                                                                  type                 status; education
                                    PARENT                                                                         CHIL IM: School
 SOCIETAL CULTURE:                                                                                                                           HEALTH &
                                PERCEPTIONS:                                                                           travel;
   Media; parenting                                                                                                                        WELLBEING AND
                                   Perceived                                                                       neighbourhood
 norms; cultural norms                                                                                                                     QUALITY OF LIFE
                             neighbourhood safety;                                                                  destinations
    and practices
                             social connectedness
                                                                                      CHILD ATTRIBUTES:
                                                                                      Confidence; skills and
                                                                                      ability; peers/siblings;
                                                                                      local knowledge; age;
                            CHILD PERCEPTIONS:                                             sex; ethnicity
                                                                                                                   SOCIAL OUTCOMES:
                                   Perceived                                                                        Chil developement;
                             neighbourhood safety;                                                                   self-esteem; risk
                                neighbourhood                                                                         management
                                  preferences
Fig. 3 Conceptual model development for children’s independent mobility (Permission to reprint by Badland et al. (2016))                                     M. Chaudhury et al.

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                   9
same age group, traffic danger (58 %), fear of assault/molestation (29 %), conve-
nience (21 %), and distance to school (22 %) were the leading four reasons given by
adults for accompanying children to school. In Norway, parents taking the same
route to the workplace as their child’s route to school was the main reason children
were driven to school by car (58 %), followed by concerns of traffic safety (21 %)
and the car being the fastest travel mode (18 %). In the Danish and Finnish studies,
the main parental concerns for accompanying children to school were road traffic
and fear of molestation from adults (Fotel 2007).
1.4       Active Transport
Active transport can contribute to children’s independent mobility and encom-
passes traveling by non-motorized travel modes, such as walking, cycling,
scootering, and skateboarding. There is a large body of evidence reporting the
significant contribution of active transport to or from school (Cooper et al. 2005;
Salmon et al. 2007) and other nonschool travel destinations (Mackett et al. 2005)
in overall children’s physical activity. Active travel to school has been shown to
be an important source of physical activity in young children (Schoeppe
et al. 2012). Walking is free and convenient and has been described as a “near-
perfect exercise.” Cooper et al. (2005) used accelerometry with Danish primary
school-aged children to study walking, cycling, and motorized transport to school.
The authors found walking to school was associated with higher levels of overall
physical activity compared with motorized transport. Cycling was also associated
with higher levels of physical activity, but only among boys. Furthermore, a
national survey of the US youth has shown a steep decline from 1969 to 2001
(41–13 %) in children’s active commuting to school, while motorized transport
(by car) to school has increased in this period from 17 to 55 % (McDonald 2008;
Shaw et al. 2013). Following on from Hillman’s earlier work (Hillman
et al. 1990), active transport from home to school among English children
decreased between 1971 and 2010 (86–25 %) (Shaw et al. 2013). The decline in
active transport has been observed in many countries in Europe and elsewhere
(Fyhri et al. 2011). Although the US national survey data are not directly com-
parable to those presented by Fyhri et al. (2011), it is clear that the overall picture
of active travel, particularly walking and cycling, is on the decline, and in contrast
transport by vehicular modes has become a predominant form of personal mobil-
ity (van der Ploeg et al. 2008).
   Apart from a “near-perfect exercise,” active transport has been targeted as a way
of increasing energy expenditure in children and combating rising levels of obesity
in children (Harten and Olds 2004). There are also a number of positive health and
social benefits from active transport including mental health, cognitive develop-
ment self-esteem, improved behavior, and relationship building (Jan 2011). The
decline in active transport is particularly well documented in relation to trips to
school. The shift in active travel to school may be explained by a number of
reasons, for example, parent’s negative perception of the neighborhood, including

10                                                                 M. Chaudhury et al.
concerns of stranger danger and traffic safety, the increasing distances to schools,
and time pressures (Oliver and Schofield 2010). Though globally on the decline, it
should be acknowledged that children’s active travel practices vary by country and
geographic region.
   Distance and trip duration, such as home to school journeys, are the main
factors which influence whether one uses active and passive transport modes
(Oliver and Schofield 2010). Furthermore, distinct differences can be found for
walking and cycling, distance to location being greater for children who walk
(Schlossberg et al. 2006), while increased trip duration may affect cycling more
than walking (Ewing et al. 2004). Findings from studies in the early 2000s from
the United Kingdom and Australia reported that distance to school was the main
factor affecting the likelihood that a trip would be active (Black et al. 2001;
Harten and Olds 2004). In Harten and Olds’ (2004) study on Australian children
aged 11–12 years, trip data were collected on two school days and one nonschool
day. They reported that children made an average of one active trip per day, with
median trip length of 0.63 km and the mean total distance per child per day being
0.61 km. In the Black et al.(2001) study of English children aged 5–10 years,
50 % of the trips to school were by active commute up to a distance of 2.0 km.
Urban planning literature suggests that key destinations should be with
400–450 m (approximately 5 min walking) of residential areas and within
800 m of public transportation. In Metcalf et al. (2004) study of 275 younger
English children (year one, aged 5 years), the median time taken to walk to
school was 6min and the median distance accompanied actively travel distance
was 0.7 km.
   More recent studies are finding similar results to this early research. A recent
review by Wong et al. (2011) identified 17 studies between 1960 and 2010, of
which 15 studies reported negative associations between distance to school by
either walking or cycling to school or both. No study reported a positive association
between distance to school and active transport. McDonald (2007) reported a
negative association with active school travel when the trips were short (i.e., less
than 1.6 km); no associations were found for trips greater than 1.6 km. A summary
from current literature provided conclusive evidence that increasing distance is
negatively associated with active school travel (Wong et al. 2011). Promotion of
active travel modes such as walking and cycling, with peers or independently in the
built environment, has greater prospects if school catchment area is explicitly
considered (Black et al. 2001). A handful of studies have measured children’s
independent mobility in the form of children’s (unsupervised) active travel to
various destinations (Page et al. 2009; Wen et al. 2009), and one study has looked
at unsupervised outdoor play as an indicator of children’s independent mobility
(Floyd et al. 2011). Schoeppe et al. (2012)recently reviewed the associations
between children’s independent mobility and active travel. The systematic review
reported a vast majority of active travel studies focused on children’s transport
behavior (active/motorized) to and from school. The review noted that only five
studies examined active transport to nonschool locations, suggesting a gap in
research that needs to be addressed.

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                     11
1.5        Associations Between Children’s Independent Mobility
           and Physical Activity
Physical activity is defined as any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles
that result in energy expenditure. This behavior is not limited to sport and exercise,
but it is classified as any activity that raises the heart. Children that engage in active
transport behavior are more likely to be physically active overall and have higher
levels of energy expenditure. The benefits of different types of physical activity
differ across life stages. While morbidity and premature mortality increase into
adulthood and older age, exposure to risk through inactivity begins in childhood.
Participating in 60 min of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity daily in children
has significant health benefits, including improved muscular and bone strength and
aerobic fitness and reduced risk of adiposity (Strong et al. 2005). In addition, long-
term benefits include reducing risk for chronic diseases such as cardiovascular
disease, obesity, type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, and some cancers (Banks
et al. 2012) and improved mental health. Time spent outdoors by children is a
consistent correlate of physical activity (Wen et al. 2009), and reductions in active
travel and in children’s independent mobility may be contributors to the decline in
physical activity levels (Page et al. 2009).
1.6        Children’s Independent Mobility Associations with Health
           and Social Outcomes
The benefits of children’s independent mobility can be seen as twofold. Firstly,
being independently mobile allows a child to engage in non-formalized physical
activity, which has been shown to be important for children achieving daily
physical activity requirements (World Health Organization 2010). Secondly, chil-
dren’s independent mobility has an important role in fostering children’s physical,
social, emotional, cognitive, and spatial development (Kytta¨ 2004). Additionally,
engaging in children’s independent mobility provides opportunities to develop life-
long skills including social connectedness, to contribute to community social
capital, and to make calculated judgments to safely navigate risky situations, such
as crossing busy roads or encountering strangers (Rudner 2012).
1.7        Children’s Independent Mobility and the Environment
The design of the neighborhood built environment can have an impact on children’s
independent mobility. In the review by Davison and Lawson (2006) which focused
on the relationship between the built environment and children’s physical activity,
they reported a positive association with traffic density, speed, and local conditions
such as crime rates. Similarly, one Australian study found that perception of unsafe
round environments was negatively associated with walking and cycling among
10–12-year-olds (Timperio et al. 2004).

12                                                                    M. Chaudhury et al.
    Attributes in the urban built environment may explain some of the changes
documented in children’s independent mobility behavior. Environmental features
that may influence children’s independent mobility include distribution, accessibil-
ity, aesthetics, and quality of destinations such as public open space, presence of
green space/greenery (Giles-Corti et al. 2005a), size of public open spaces such as
parks, perceived neighborhood safety (Pooley et al. 2005a; Rudner 2012), and
increased motorized traffic (Hillman et al. 1990; Zwerts et al. 2010). More walkable
neighborhoods (i.e., those with high street connectivity, residential density, and
mixed use) have positive associations with walking activity among adults; however
better street connectivity means more exposure to vehicular traffic, which may not
be conducive for active travel behavior in children.
    Evidence suggests that neighborhoods with parks, play areas, recreational facil-
ities, pedestrian infrastructure, and sporting venues available facilitate higher active
travel among children (Pont et al. 2009); these may also be appropriate locations to
support children’s independent mobility.
1.8       Definition and Importance of Public Open Space
Public space and public open spaces include parks, green spaces, plazas, sidewalks,
shopping malls, community centers, and schoolyards. There are a number of
subjective definitions of what constitutes a public space or public open space within
the built environment literature with overlapping features as described. Further-
more public open spaces can include land space areas for playgrounds and “blue
space” areas of water including rivers, canals, lakes, and reservoirs. Crucially,
public open spaces are spaces freely accessible to all and may have multiple uses
by multiple users, including sport and recreational opportunities. In this chapter,
public open spaces have been defined as “parks and green space that can be freely
accessed by the public” (Badland et al. 2010).
    Public open spaces are recognized as important settings to promote physical
activity engagement in the neighborhood built environment (Timperio et al. 2008).
This is not only by use of purpose-built infrastructure (e.g., playgrounds) but
because they operate as potential destinations to actively travel to and as destina-
tions to travel through. Public open spaces may also confer health and well-being
benefits by fostering social connectedness, communication skills, and friendship
development (Lachowycz and Jones 2013; Sugiyama et al. 2008). Evidence also
suggests that children’s body mass index is lower when they have access to more
green space (Lachowycz and Jones 2011).
    Multidimensional physical characteristics of the neighborhood may contribute
to various forms of activity engagement among youth in their immediate environ-
ment. The relationship between child and neighborhood environment needs to be
further explored to add to the existing body of knowledge of what contributes or
hinders children’s independent mobility.

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                  13
1.9       Public Open Space Use by Children
Simply providing green space in a neighborhood is not enough for individuals in the
community; attention needs to take place in its design and qualities for it to be
beneficial for all groups (Villanueva et al. 2013). Access to good quality green
space has positive associations with physical and mental health and well-being
(Francis et al. 2012). The use of green space also provides an area for social contact
with others, freedom for play, and destinations to walk or cycle and engage in
physical activity (Veitch et al. 2008). Access to appropriate facilities for physical
activity and active play has been previously identified as a key determinant of
activity participation (Sallis et al. 1993), and public open spaces need to be flexible
to accommodate a diverse community and populations (Cabe Space 2004). What is
not well known is how public open space availability, safety, and accessibility are
conducive for children’s independent mobility and children’s active play. For
example, safety features of a public open space have been identified as important
contributors to their use. Lighting, dog fouling, graffiti, vandalism, and
unmaintained areas all contribute to a perceived lack of safety, which reduces the
use of green space in children and adolescents (Cabe Space 2004).
   Availability and quality of public open spaces are used widely in health research
to determine relationships among the physical environment, physical activity, and
health. Availability and access to parks near home are associated with higher levels
of physical activity in youth (Cohen et al. 2006). Quality of public green space is an
important determinant of health and influences their use for children; key consid-
erations include safety, toilets, drinking water, lighting, and pathways (Sallis
et al. 1997; Veitch et al. 2006). Crawford et al.(2008), when looking at features
of public open spaces in contrasting socioeconomic neighborhoods, found those in
more disadvantaged areas had more amenities (e.g., toilets, drink fountains) and
better shading from trees, walking and cycling paths, and lighting than public open
spaces in more advantaged areas. Similar results have been reported elsewhere
(Giles-Corti et al. 2003).
   Park proximity, size, and features have been minimally investigated among
children (Kaczynski and Henderson 2007). Giles-Corti et al. (2005a) indicated
that among similar-sized parks, those public open spaces rated “higher quality”
versus “lower quality” were more likely to attract users to engage in physical
activity. Having good access to larger public open spaces was also associated
with higher levels of walking in adults. Conversely, Kaczynski et al. (2008)
reported size and distance of park were not significant predictors for use among
adults, although specific features inside the park (e.g., paved trails) were positively
related with use.
   Though most public open space studies have focused on physical activity and
active play, it is thought that attention needs to be paid to measuring children’s
independent mobility, an important contributor for daily physical activity. To date
very few studies have attempted to relate environmental attributes to children’s
independent mobility in specific locations.

14                                                                    M. Chaudhury et al.
1.10      How Have Public Open Spaces Been Measured?
A number of direct observational methods have been employed in health research to
code attributes of physical activity environments, and a summary of these can be
found by Sallis (2009). The chapter discusses observational tools used to measure
physical activity behavior in specific settings (e.g., schools, stairways) and auditing
of specific environments.
    Largely, direct observation audits have been used to audit public open spaces
(parks and green space). Audit tool examples include the Bedimo-Rung Assessment
Tool, Environmental Assessment of Public Recreation Spaces Tool, Community
Park Audit Tool, and Public Open Space Audit Tool (Giles-Corti et al. 2005a).
These inventories all vary in length and type of environmental information col-
lected. Other tools collect data objectively on both individual and environmental
levels, for example, System of Observing Play and Leisure Activity in Youth and
System for Observing Play and Recreation in Communities. Details of these tools
and resources can be found elsewhere (Active Living Research 2014).
    Taylor et al. (2011) measured the quality of public open spaces using a new
remote-assessment approach, Google Earth Pro. The study assessed the correlation
between remote assessment of quality of public open spaces using Google Earth
and direct observation using a shortened version of the Public Open Space Audit
Tool. Fifty parks were selected to be assessed by the remote method and scores
compared with some parks using Public Open Space Audit Tool. Strengths of the
remote method were the speed at which audits could be completed, facilitating a
larger number of environmental audits without the need of in-person visits. Limi-
tations of this remote-assessment method were that some items could not be
accurately scored due to obstructed view or poor resolution, particularly regarding
aesthetic features. Additionally, satellite imagery data may not be current in some
areas, as images may be up to 3 years old and thus not accounting for spaces where
redevelopment has occurred. Advantages of these direct observation audits are that
they are user-friendly tools to measure different environmental characteristics, with
no participant bias, and they are easy to conduct. Disadvantages include the cost
and need to train auditors, and depending on length of audit, it may be time
consuming to collect the data.
1.11      What Is the Relationship with Children’s Independent
          Mobility and Public Open Space
Within the built environment, places where a child engages in physical activity and
active play are important to study to establish factors affecting youth physical
activity (Ellaway et al. 2007; Giles-Corti et al. 2005b). Play areas are potentially
important areas for children’s mental, social, and physical health and for social
contact with other children (Ellaway et al. 2007). There is limited data on the
relationship between children’s independent mobility and public open space as the
majority of children’s independent mobility studies have investigated physical

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                 15
activity in school locations (including active travel to school), neighborhood streets,
and parks (Grow et al. 2008). However, Giles-Corti and King (2009) suggest most
individuals obtain physical activity from more than one context, which includes
walking and cycling and free play.
   Past research in children aged 10–12 years reported that absence of nearby parks
and sports venues was related to decrease walking and cycling trips (Timperio
et al. 2004). Children spent less time in engaging in sedentary activities (i.e.,
computer/e-games and watching television) when living near a larger-sized park
with a water feature and/or whose parents reported greater satisfaction with park
quality (Veitch et al. 2011). Similarly, Grow et al. (2008) showed that regardless of
age, living closer to a larger public park and public open spaces increased the
likelihood of being active.
   It is also possible that sex differences exist for utilizing public open spaces.
Some studies have indicated that in youth, boys tend to roam more freely and
independently in public open spaces in their neighborhood than girls (Page
et al. 2009; Villanueva et al. 2012; Wen et al. 2009). Villanueva et al. (2012)
examined how far children traveled from home within the neighborhood; parental
perceptions reported in favor of boys being more able to safely negotiate traffic
conditions better than girls. Stronger association between access to green space and
physical activity has been found for boys (Page et al. 2009; Villanueva et al. 2012).
For example, in a cross-sectional study by Page et al. (2009), in the neighborhood,
boys aged 10–11 years reported higher children’s independent mobility compared
to girls.
1.12      What Is the Relationship with Public Open Space and Area-
          Level Disadvantage
The relationship between individual and environmental characteristics in influenc-
ing health and health-related behaviors is well established in literature (Strategic
Review of Health Inequalities in England 2010). Living in a disadvantaged neigh-
borhood compared to living in a more advantaged neighborhood has been linked to
poorer health outcomes in individuals (including children), with higher rates of
chronic disease, and associated risk factors such as obesity (Diez-Roux 2001). This
has been shown for total and coronary heart disease mortality (Diez-Roux
et al. 1997), coronary heart disease prevalence and risk factors (Smith
et al. 1998), and depression (Yen and Kaplan 1999). Macintyre (2007) described
this as “deprivation amplification.” These variations in health are explained as
compositional (individual level) and contextual (area level) (Diez-Roux 2001;
Macintyre 2007).
   Conflicting evidence exists where some populations exposed to more green
environments report lower levels of health inequalities (Mitchell and Popham
2008), and several studies in New Zealand have shown that socioeconomically
deprived urban communities have better access to parks (Badland et al. 2010;
Pearce et al. 2008). Yet other research suggests communities in more disadvantaged

16                                                                   M. Chaudhury et al.
neighborhoods have poorer green space availability than more affluent neighbor-
hoods (Estabrooks et al. 2003). Nevertheless, access, location, and quality are
important attributes for determining public open space use within a neighborhood.
In contrast, Richardson et al. (2010) suggest the availability of public green space in
New Zealand may not be as an important determinant of health as found elsewhere.
   The Strategic Review of Health Inequalities in England 2009 Marmot Report
advocated that there should be green space within 4 min of every family home
(2010). Using international data, the report found a significant lack of green spaces
and play spaces for children in disadvantaged neighborhoods. Other empirical
research suggests that the relationship between area-level disadvantage and public
open space access varies nationally.
   Studies of the locations of children’s outdoor playgrounds have found them
more common in and closer to poorer areas in Scotland and the USA (Cradock
et al. 2005; Ellaway et al. 2007). However in Australia, Crawford et al. (2008)
found no difference in number of playgrounds and recreational facilities between
higher and lower disadvantaged neighborhoods, and most of their participants (aged
8–9 years) lived about 300 m to their closest public open space. Veitch et al. (2008)
addressed the importance of park proximity to home within Australian neighbor-
hoods. They reported that children living in low socioeconomic outer-urban neigh-
borhoods had to travel a greater distance to access local parks for active free play
compared with higher socioeconomic areas. Together, this work highlights the
conflicting findings presented thus far.
   In addition, researchers have looked at the quality of parks and playgrounds for
children’s play with regard to their safety and availability by area-level disadvan-
tage (Cradock et al. 2005; Curtice et al. 2005; Ellaway et al. 2007; Ellaway
et al. 2001). Ellaway et al. (2001) reported people who lived in poorer areas of
Glasgow were more likely to report a lack of safe places for children to play in their
neighborhood. Similarly in 2005, a Scotland-wide study found 45 % of people
living in deprived areas compared to 4 % of those in affluent areas reported a
problem with the availability of safe places for children to play (Curtice et al. 2005).
Cradock et al. (2005) found that in Boston, USA, young people from poorer areas
lived closer to playground facilities than those in more advantaged areas; however
the playground equipment in poorer areas was unsafe and poorly maintained. The
quality of public open space for influencing children’s use is also important.
Badland et al. (2010) analyzed public open spaces in 12 urban neighborhoods in
New Zealand and found no difference in quality of public open space by area-level
deprivation; however public open space safety score was greater in more disadvan-
taged areas compared with least disadvantaged areas. However, this study did not
look at the association between quality of public open space and individuals’ use of
public open space.
   A 2007 Scottish study investigated the provision of outdoor play areas for
children in relation to area disadvantaged per 1000 total population. The results
of the study pointed toward more play areas being available in more disadvantaged
areas compared with less disadvantaged areas (Ellaway et al. 2007). Similar
findings were reported in a Danish study (Karsten 2002); however this study did

Public Open Spaces, Children´s Independent Mobility                                             17
not assess the quality and use of the playgrounds. An Australian study revealed a
reduction in active travel to school (by foot and cycle) among 9–13-year-olds
between 1985 and 2001 in contrasting neighborhoods. In higher socioeconomic
areas, this reduction was 50 %, while in lower socioeconomic areas active travel
declined by 77 % among children (Salmon et al. 2007).
   It is not yet clear whether quality, quantity, or a measure of both is most
important for public open space use; several studies have started to investigate
these associations with various health outcomes. One Australian study explored the
relationship between quality and quantity of public open space attributes and
mental health among adults. The authors found that quality of public open space
within a neighborhood was more important than quantity (Francis et al. 2012). This
warrants further investigation as to the relationship of quality and quantity together
with public open space by neighborhood disadvantage among children has not been
examined.
2          Conclusion
1. The evidence of the potential health and well-being benefits of public open
   spaces have increased immensely over the last decade along with the growing
   research interest in public open space in the urban built environment.
2. Most public open space studies have focused on physical activity and active
   play; more attention needs to be paid to measuring children’s independent
   mobility, an important contributor of daily physical activity.
3. The evidence base linking public open space attributes with children’s indepen-
   dent mobility is limited, for example, mobility in specific locations, and to date
   very few studies have explored this relationship.
4. Multidimensional physical characteristics of the neighborhood may contribute
   to various forms of activity engagement among youth in their immediate envi-
   ronment. The relationship between child and neighborhood environment needs
   further exploration.
References
Active Living Research. (2014). Active living research: Using evidence to prevent childhood
   obesity and create active communities. Retrieved 23 August, 2014. http://activelivingresearch.
   org/
Badland, H. M., & Oliver, M. (2012). Child independent mobility: Making the case, and under-
   standing how the physical and social environments impact on the behaviour. In E. Turunen &
   A. Koskinen (Eds.), Urbanization and the global environment. New York: Nova Science.
Badland, M. H., et al. (2010). Examining public open spaces by neighborhood-level walkability
   and deprivation. Journal of Physical Activity & Health, 7(6), 818–824.
Badland, H., et al. (2016). Development of a systems model to visualise the complexity of
   children’s independent mobility. Children’s Geographies, 14(1), 91–100.
Banks, L., et al. (2012). Physical activity interacts with adiposity in determining cardiometabolic
   risk in adolescents. Pediatric Exercise Science, 24(4), 537–548.

