    S50                                  Abstracts / Journal of Transport & Health 7 (2017) S4–S87


Variability in Vehicle and Pedestrian Counts and its Effect on Warrant Evaluations
(breakout presentation)

Brian Gaas

City of Calgary, Canada



Background: Requests for pedestrian crossings are evaluated using warrant criteria. Different properties of the
location, such as vehicle and pedestrian volumes, are fed into a weighted matrix. If the location scores high
enough, the location is placed on a waiting list to get the pedestrian crossing.
Aim: We performed a desktop statistical and simulation study to quantify the potential effects of variability in
vehicle and pedestrian counts on warrant evaluations.
Method: Total pedestrian and total vehicle counts collected between 2013 and 2016 at controlled intersections
were extracted from the City's traffic count database. The dataset was limited to standard 6 hr counts taken on
weekdays, encompassing the periods between 07:00-09:00, 11:00-13:00, and 16:00-18:00. School and non-
school periods were analyzed separately. Variability in vehicle and pedestrian volumes was defined using the
relative percent difference (RPD) between subsequent pairs of dates at each location. The likelihood of a given
vehicle or pedestrian volume meeting a warrant criterion was based on the empirical probability distributions
of the RPDs extracted from the database.
Results: Overall variability was 9% for vehicle counts, and 20% for pedestrians. Variability in vehicle counts
was not related to total volume, while variability in pedestrian counts was 10% larger on average (overall
variability of 30%) when pedestrian volumes were low. Simulation results suggest that vehicle volumes of 187
and 468 were sufficiently close to the warrant criteria that, if a location were recounted, 20% of the time the
observed volumes would meet the 200-500 and 4 500 vehicle warrant criteria, respectively. Similarly, pe-
destrian volumes of 13 and 26 could be observed 20% of the time as meeting the 15-30 and 430 pedestrian
warrant criteria, respectively.
Conclusions: This study validates the use of the canonical 10% variability in vehicle volumes for Calgary. It also
provides a default value for variability in pedestrian volumes. Evaluations based on fixed thresholds should
account for variability in the input data. Simulations based on empirical probability distributions provide a
low cost, low effort method of quantifying and predicting the effects of variability in vehicle and pedestrian
volumes.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.11.082




The Six E’s of Active School Travel: How Active and Safe Routes to School (ASRTS) Programs Across
Canada Increase the Number of Children Walking to School Every Day (breakout presentation)

Natalia Diaz-Insense 1, Lesley McEwan 2, Jamie Hilland 3

1
  Ecology Action Centre, Canada
2
  Safe Healthy People Everywhere (SHAPE), Canada
3
  Green Action Centre, Canada



   In this ASRTS Canada collaborative presentation, three Active and Safe Routes to School (ASRTS) Programs
from different regions of the country will discuss the various strategies they employ to increase the numbers
of children engaged in sustainable, healthy school travel every day. The numbers of children who walk or bike
to school on a daily basis has been in steep decline since the early 1980’s, with a nationwide average of less
than 20% of Canadian schoolchildren regularly walking or biking to school in 2015, from a high of over 80 % in
the 1970’s. This has resulted in vehicle congestion around schools, poor air quality due to the high volume of
vehicles, increased injuries due to increased traffic, and poor health outcomes as children are increasingly
driven short distances instead of exercising.
   Starting in Europe in the 1970’s, and adopted in Canada in the mid 1990’s, ASRTS programs across the
country seek to improve the health of our population through daily exercise, cleaner air due to reduced vehicle

                                        Abstracts / Journal of Transport & Health 7 (2017) S4–S87              S51


emissions, and fewer injuries due to safer infrastructure and fewer vehicles on the roads. To do this, these
programs have adopted many of the principles of the Safe Routes to School Partnership in the United States,
that being the six E’s: Evaluation, Engineering, Events, Enforcement, Equity, and Encouragement. In Canada,
our programs have focused much of our efforts on a process known as School Travel Planning, whereby local
residents and the school community are active participants in identifying the barriers to Active Transportation
in their community, provide input on ways to remove these barriers, and become engaged in seeking re-
solution to these issues on an ongoing basis.
   This presentation will discuss specific actions and programs employed to encourage Active School Travel,
successes and failures, and lessons learned from these three ASRTS organizations in different regions of Ca-
nada. If you are interested in promoting healthy school travel in your community, we invite you to attend and
share your stories with us as well, as we seek to make our children safer, healthier and happier.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.11.083




S3:05
Community Actions to Improve Safe Walking

Active Neighbourhoods Canada - Building Community-based Mandates for Walkable Urban Design
(breakout presentation)

Celia Lee, Matt Knapik, Noel Keough

Sustainable Calgary, Canada



Background: The Active Neighbourhoods Canada (ANC) project supports walking, cycling and vibrant streets
through community-led and professionally developed urban design projects. The project represents a part-
nership between the Montreal Urban Ecology Centre, Toronto Centre for Active Transportation and Sustain-
able Calgary.
Description of Program: Since 2013, each organization has been working with four communities, with the aim
of implementing a design project in each. Major milestones include leading a participatory planning process;
producing a “community portrait” that summarizes resident feedback and data; a professional design
workshop; 3-5 design schemes for each neighbourhood; and a design selection kiosk, at which community
members can provide feedback and vote on design concepts. This presentation focuses on the outcomes of an
innovative engagement and design process in the communities with which Sustainable Calgary worked,
namely: Bridgeland, Acadia, Marlborough and High River. Each community was situated in its own unique
context, but also presented prototypical urban conditions through which to understand the broader region.
Outcomes: In Bridgeland, we were challenged to consider the impact of major thoroughfares on liveability,
and re-invite connectivity into a socially-isolated remnant institutional district. In Acadia, we tackled traffic-
calming and urban legibility – in a neighbourhood with schools, seniors, and significant cut-through traffic –
and proposed a model for the "soft edge" of a commercial zone. In Marlborough, we found under-used
laneway spaces and pocket parks that could be brought back to life through green networks and moments of
’social refuge’. In High River, our view turned both big and small – from completing broad pathway routes to
creating inviting pedestrian-scale spaces in the core. Between all four communities, common themes emerged
around closed loops, active green edges and networks, and the spaces ‘behind’ primary roadways.
Implications: This work showed how participatory urban design can influence improvements in the shape of
communities, encourage empathy and activism among residents, and help develop a collective mandate for
community change. Strategic collaboration was crucial to achieving milestones in this project, and our
strengths-based approach proved important in capturing the imagination and enthusiasm of local residents
and designers alike.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.11.084

