Transportmetrica A: Transport Science, 2015
Vol. 11, No. 3, 270–289, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23249935.2014.968654
        A joint model for mode choice and escort decisions of school trips
                    Alireza Ermaguna* , Taha Hossein Rashidib and Amir Samimic
    a Humphrey School of Public Affairs, University of Minnesota: Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, USA;
 b School of Civil and Environment Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia;
              c Department of Civil Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehra¯n, Iran
                            (Received 7 October 2013; accepted 19 September 2014)
       A considerable shift has occurred in mode choice behaviour and escort pattern of students
       for their school trips around the world during the last few decades. This shift towards using
       more non-active modes has undesirable consequences, including physical inactivity among
       students, traffic jams during peak hours, and adverse environmental impacts. Hence, under-
       standing the behaviour of decision-makers with regard to the mode choice and escorting
       pattern selection is crucial for controlling the trend of the shift and promoting active modes.
       This study is the first effort to mathematically model the mode choice and accompaniment
       pattern selection by parents for the school trip of students, in a joint modelling structure as it
       is believed that these two decisions are jointly made by parents. Two modelling formulations
       are used: a nested logit (NL) model and a copula-based model. Results showed that the copula
       model outperforms the NL model. It was also found that modelling these two decisions in an
       independent manner can result in misleading policy assessments.
       Keywords: nested logit; copula formulation; mode choice; escort behaviour; school trips
1. Introduction
A considerable shift has happened in the mode choice decision of school trips around the world
during the last few decades. For instance, around 40% of US students travelled by non-motorised
modes of transport such as biking and walking in 1969. However, this percentage dropped to
less than 13% by 2001 (McDonald 2007). During the same period, the share of trips made by
automobiles to school experienced a significant jump from 17% to 55% (McDonald 2007). The
change in the mode choice decision of students has been associated with changes in several other
travel attributes. For instance, according to Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg (1990), only 54%
of students of 10 years of age in London in 1990 made an independent trip to and from school,
while the corresponding percentage was 94% in 1971. This study further showed that parents
preferred to accompany their kids to school due to concerns such as travel safety. Such changes
in mode choice pattern of school trips triggered several concerns among policy-makers and urban
planners in different ways.
   First, the decrease in the use of active modes of transport such as walking and biking resulted in
a decrease in students’ physical activities and thereby led to an overweight and obesity epidemic
as they aged (Faulkner et al. 2009). These health-related issues then imposed an unsettled cost
on society. Studies (Ebbeling, Pawlak, and Ludwig 2002; Andersen et al. 2006) show that the
increase in obesity rates can escalate the risk of contracting cardiovascular diseases, diabetes type
*Corresponding author. Email: ermag001@umn.edu
c 2014 Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies Limited

                               Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                               271
II, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, atherosclerosis, sleep apnoea, and asthma. These studies also
indicate that the spread of these diseases, caused by obesity, consumes about 21% of the annual
healthcare budget (World Health Organization 1997). Accordingly, promoting the use of active
modes of transport, especially during the childhood and adolescence, provides an opportunity for
children to perform the required daily physical activity which then can diminish the occurrence
of several diseases throughout their life and ease a considerable amount of financial burden from
the society (Cooper et al. 2005).
   Second, an unreasonable increase in the use of vehicles for school trips entails undesir-
able environmental outcomes including increasing air pollution and rising energy consumption
(Wilson, Wilson, and Krizek 2007).
   Third, as students are typically dependent on other family members to give them a ride to
school, a considerable number of unnecessary trips are generated in cities, especially during the
peak morning and afternoon hours, which then leads to a more congested network (Yarlagadda
and Srinivasan 2008; Loo and Lam 2013).
   Fourth, an increase in vehicle-ridership as a result of the preference of some parents to provide
independent rides for their children increases the accident risk for students who use active trans-
portation modes. Therefore, some parents use private cars for the safety of their kids, which, in
turn, reduces safety for other students, and then the cycle repeats (Kerr et al. 2006).
   The aforementioned concerns show the importance of identifying the factors that contribute
to the mode choice decision in school trips which is closely affected by the accompaniment
decision. Although there are a few studies (Vovsha and Petersen 2005; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan
2008; McDonald and Aalborg 2009) discussing why parents prefer to escort their kids to school,
the escort decision has not yet been jointly studied with travel mode decision. Understanding the
reciprocal impact of mode choice and escorting decisions on one another can reveal information
on how active modes of transport can be promoted while parents’ concerns such as safety are also
addressed. This paper attempts to contribute to the area of school travel behaviour by presenting
a joint model for these two decisions. It also aims to develop an understanding on how fewer
auto-based school trips can be generated during rush hours.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, the related literature is reviewed, followed
by a discussion on the data used for the analysis. The methodology section, then, elaborates on
how the mathematical formulation of the model is derived. Following this, the modelling results
are presented and discussed. The paper concludes with a discussion on the remarkable findings
and potential avenues for future research.
2. Background
This part of the paper reviews the studies previously conducted on mode choice decisions and
accompaniment decisions in school trips. Table 1 indicates the studies conducted in this respect.
Studies are chosen such that they cover a wide range of analysis methods, places of studies,
transportation modes, and year of the study. In terms of the analysis method, previous studies
may be divided into two major categories: descriptive and analytical methods. Descriptive meth-
ods (Zwerts et al. 2010; Johansson, Laflamme, and Hasselberg 2012) only explain the collected
data and provide an explanatory analysis on the effect of some variables. Analytical methods,
on the other hand, use various modelling methods such as econometrics, statistics, and data
mining to analyse the data. The binary logit (Samimi and Ermagun 2012a), multinomial logit
(MNL) (McDonald 2008a), and nested logit (NL) (Samimi and Ermagun 2013) are some of
the model types that are typically used. Among these, the binary logit model has the largest
share. A reason for such a domination can be attributed to the fact that many researchers tried to

                               Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                              273
distinguish between active and non-active modes, and thus a binary logit model sufficed (McMil-
lan 2007; Zwerts et al. 2010). Nonetheless, a few studies aimed at explaining school trip mode
choice among all the available travel modes for a more realistic policy assessment. Therefore,
other types of discrete choice modelling methods emerged in school trip mode choice studies.
Ewing, Schroeer, and Greene (2004), for instance, used a MNL model for the first time in 2004
to analyse the propensity for choosing walking, biking, public transportation, and private cars in
school trips. A recent study (Samimi and Ermagun 2013) used a NL model for the first time to
analyse students’ mode choice behaviour. This study elaborated on the consequences of model
misspecification in terms of incorrect policy assessments. Vovsha and Peterson (2005) pioneered
in analysing students’ travel behaviours using more advanced modelling methods. In their study,
three alternatives of ridesharing with a household driver on a mandatory tour, escorting by a
household driver on a non-mandatory tour, and having no escort were analysed using a NL
model. Following this work, Yarlagadda and Srinivasan (2008) studied the escorting behaviour
of 4353 students in San Francisco Bay Area. This is the only study in which the two decisions of
mode choice and escorting are simultaneously modelled using a MNL structure.
   A considerably large set of explanatory variables have already been examined in school trip
studies. Studies on mode choice decisions and escorting patterns of school trips have struggled
to identify factors affecting both decisions (Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008). In general, these
factors may be classified into four categories: (1) characteristics of the students, (2) characteris-
tics of the households, (3) urban characteristics, and (4) parental preferences. Table 2 shows the
effect of these variables on mode choice decisions and escorting in past studies.
   Explanatory variables that are found to be influential on mode choice decision include age
and gender of the students, household vehicle ownership status, family income, safety concern
of parents, and distance to school. There is a consensus on a positive correlation between the
propensity of driving students to school and income (Wilson et al. 2010), car ownership (Wen
et al. 2007), and distance (Wen et al. 2007). Contradictory findings, nonetheless, are reported on
the impact of some other variables. The impact of age, for example, has been investigated in a
research for students aged between 11 and 13 years (Martin, Lee, and Lowry 2007) and in another
for students between 14 and 18 years old (McDonald 2007). These two studies found completely
different results for the role of age in students’ mode choice decision. The former study found a
negative value for the age variable, while the latter found a positive one. This discrepancy can be
attributed to the consideration of different age groups of high school and middle school students.
Gender is another pivotal variable affecting transportation mode choices in school trip. Most
studies (McMillan et al. 2006; McDonald 2008a) have noted that boys’ propensity to use active
modes are higher than girls’. A contrary finding, however, was reported by Leslie et al. (2010)
for a study conducted on 2961 10–14 years old students in Australia that showed a disparate
transportation mode choice pattern between boys and girls. This study found that the probability
of walking is about 44% and 37% for girls and boys respectively. However, boys’ tendency to
bike is about three times greater than girls’. The last category of variables is parental preferences.
Students’ travel safety is the most influential reservation of parents that hinders students’ active
travel (McMillan 2007).
   In addition to the impact of the aforementioned variables on the mode choice behaviour,
working status of parents, having siblings, vehicle ownership status, family income, and dis-
tance to school have been found to be influential on escort behaviours. As stated by Vovsha
and Peterson (2005), a positive association exists between the likelihood of escorting students
to school and income, car ownership, and home-to-school distance. Age is also shown to have
a negative correlation with the propensity of accompanying students to school (Guo et al. 2005;
Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008). Furthermore, female students are more likely to be driven to
school (Zwerts et al. 2010). Findings show conflicting results about the role of having siblings

                              Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                               275
on escort behaviours (McDonald 2008b). The role of intra-household interactions on students’
escort behaviours is an emerging research area.
   The current literature has certain gaps that are addressed to some extent in this paper. First,
there is a dominant focus on active modes of transportation while other modes are less studied.
Second, the decision about the mode of transport and children escorting for school trip is a
joint decision which is made by parents. Accordingly, considering these two decisions in a joint
structure is an innovative way to model what happens in reality. This is a major contribution
of this paper which has not yet been addressed. Third, parents have several concerns that affect
their decision of mode choice and escorting their students, such as safety, comfort, reliability,
cost of travel, and travel time (McDonald and Aalborg 2009; Samimi and Ermagun 2013). These
variables have been paid less attention in previous works. Thus, this paper aims to address this
lacuna in the literature.
3. Data
In order to jointly study the two decisions of mode choice and escorting for school trips, four
basic sets of data are used in this paper, including urban characteristics, transportation systems
characteristics, socio-demographic data of households, and travel attributes. Urban characteris-
tics and transportation systems characteristics include information about the population density
of the zone in which home and school are located, costs of different modes of transport, and the
duration of a trip for each mode. The Tehran Census (2009) was consulted to obtain land use and
system data for the other two categories, and data were obtained from the survey conducted on
4700 students of 12–17 years of age in Tehran in May 2011.
   To conduct the survey, a questionnaire was designed consisting of two sections. The first
section enquires about the respondent’s socio-demographic information such as gender, age, and
family income. The second section collects information about the respondent’s travel data such
as travel mode, reasons for choosing the mode, and the pattern of escorting children. Parents are
asked to complete the survey as they are more informed about the questions (McMillan 2005).
A response rate of 72% was obtained for the data collection exercise, which is a considerable
achievement compared to similar data collection efforts (Larsen et al. 2009; Wilson et al. 2010).
   With respect to the gender segregation in Iranian schools, a stratified sampling method was
employed considering school level, gender, and students’ location. Primary school students are
not included in the survey as they have a totally different travel behaviour due to their high level
of dependency (McMillan 2005). Four travel modes were asked about in this survey, including
walking, private car, school bus, and public transport. Biking was over looked, because less than
1% in the sample used it.
   To analyse the pattern of escorting students, a question was included in the questionnaire
asking about six choices: (1) no escort, (2) escort by parents on their way to work, (3) escort by
parents only to take students to school, (4) part of school travel of other children of the household,
(5) escort by school bus, and (6) escort by siblings or friends. In all, 42% of students are escorted
in their school trips, while only 12% of all trips are reported to have some level of escorting.
Table 3 contains a description of the data utilised in the study.
4.   Methodology
4.1. Generalised extreme value models
Selecting from among a set of mutually exclusive alternatives has traditionally been modelled
using the well-known discrete choice modelling method since the early 70 s when its pop-
ularity started to increase. Exploitation of the logit formula dates back to 1959 when Luce

                                    Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                        277
Table 3. Continued.
Charac.                          Variable                      Description          Average Std. dev.
Built                          WALKSCH                1: less than 10/2: 10–20/3:    2.63     1.54
    environment                                          20–30/4: 30–40/5:
                                                         40–50/6:more than
                                                         50-minute walk time to
                                                         school
                             D_WALKSCH                1: If WALKSCH less than        0.60     0.48
                                                         3/0: Otherwise
                             D_LWALKSCH               1: If WALKSCH more             0.24     0.42
                                                         than 3/0: Otherwise
                              WALKTRNT                1: less than 5/2: 5–10/3:      1.81     0.83
                                                         10–15/4: more than
                                                         15-minute walk time
                                                         between home and the
                                                         nearest bus station
                             D_WALKTRNT               1: If WALKTRNT less            0.81     0.38
                                                         than 3/0: Otherwise
                               POPDENS                Population density in each     0.02     0.01
                                                         zone (person per m2 )
                              AUTO_TIME               Automobile travel time to      9.90     8.74
                                                         school (minute)
Parental                        SAFETY                1: If parents are primarily    0.31     0.46
    concerns                                             concerned about their
    (mother or                                           children travel safety/0:
    father)                                              Otherwise
                               RELIABLE               1: If parents are primarily    0.18     0.39
                                                         concerned about
                                                         their children travel
                                                         reliability/0: Otherwise
                               COMFORT                1: If parents are primarily    0.18     0.38
                                                         concerned about
                                                         their children travel
                                                         comfort/0: Otherwise
                              TRF_LIMIT               1: Students who live or        0.11     0.31
                                                         study in a limited traffic
                                                         zone/0: Otherwise
                                  COST                1: If parents are primarily    0.30     0.45
                                                         concerned about their
                                                         children travel cost/0:
                                                         Otherwise
a 11,800 Iranian rails were equivalent to 1 USD in May 2011.
(1959) considered the independence from irrelevant alternatives (IIA) assumption for deriv-
ing the logit formulation. Later, McFadden in 1978 proved that the generalised extreme value
(GEV) models are compatible with the random utility theory. Nevertheless, MNL and NL models
were more often chosen due to their closed-form formulation and straightforward interpretation
and estimation (Train 2009). However, the IIA assumption imposes considerable restrictions
to the application of MNL and forces cross-elasticities between all pairs of alternatives to
be identical, which may result in biased estimations and incorrect predictions (Hensher and
Greene 2002).

278                                        A. Ermagun et al.
   In the family of GEV models (see for example Bierlaire, 2006), the probability of choos-
ing alternative i in choice set C with J alternatives can be estimated using Equation (1). In
this equation, Vi is the deterministic part of the utility function, and for logit and NL models
with M nests, Gi can be calculated using Equations (2) and (3), respectively. Also, µm is the
corresponding dissimilarity parameter for each nest.
                                                    eVi +lnGi (...)
                                      P(i) = J                          .                      (1)
                                                          Vj +lnGj (...)
                                                   j=1 e
                                                µ
                                     G(x) =          xj .                                       (2)
                                               j<U+2208>C
                                                     J             µµm
                                               M        m
                                                               µ
                                     G(x) =                   xi m         .                    (3)
                                               m=1      i=1
4.2. Copula-based models
In recent years in the field of transportation, several studies investigated a variety of meth-
ods to model interdependent decisions in a joint structure (Rashidi and Mohammadian 2011;
Habib 2013; Nurul Habib, Han, and Lin 2014). The most common approach is to construct a
choice set of all possible combinations of the decisions (De Jong and Ben-Akiva 2007). Then
the conventional methods such as MNL or NL can be used to describe the choice behaviour.
Another approach is to consider a fully joint formulation in which the unobserved error terms
are correlated (Lee 1983). This method typically results in an open-form formulation with mul-
tidimensional integrals requiring simulation methods for estimation. Another approach employs
a copula function which is praised by researchers due to its closed-form formulation and effi-
cient estimation results (Trivedi and Zimmer 2007). The idea of using copula dates back to 1940
when Hoeffding (1940) tried to find the best possible boundaries for such functions. However,
the term copula function first appeared in Sklar’s (1959) study. Following these initial attempts,
many researchers attempted to explore the features of copula functions in different fields. This
led to pervasive usages of copula functions in different fields such as economics (Smith 2003),
finance (Embrechts, McNeil, and Straumann 2002), medical sciences (Clayton 1978), statistics
(Frees and Valdez 1998), and more recently transport modelling (Bhat and Eluru 2009). The
popularity of copula formulations can be attributed to several issues. First, normal distribution is
predominantly used for multivariate distribution, while the copula formulation allows many types
of marginal distributions to be used in addition to the Gaussian distribution. Second, copula dis-
tributions have the capability to account for both linear and non-linear dependencies, including
asymmetric and asymptotic. Third, although copula models are based upon complex theories,
they benefit from simple computation methods due to their closed-form formulations for the
probability function. Fourth, various types of copulas make it possible to explore different types
of correlations (Trivedi and Zimmer 2007; Bhat and Eluru 2009). Different types of copulas
had been formulated in the literature including Gaussian copula, Farlie–Gumbel–Morgenstern
copula, and Archimedean class of copulas such as Frank, Joe, Gumbel, and Clayton which are
chosen according to the problem characteristics (Bhat and Eluru 2009).
   As stated earlier, a MNL model is used for the transportation mode choice decisions for the
four alternatives mentioned earlier. Considering q as a decision-maker that has a subset of Mq as
an alternative set for mode i, the utility for ith mode can be declared as follows:
                                           uqi = ßi xqi + eqi .                                 (4)

                                  Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                                 279
   In this equation, xqi is the observed attribute vector of the ith mode with respect to qth household
and ßi is the corresponding coefficient vector that should be estimated in the estimation process.
Additionally, eqi is the error term of the utility, which is assumed to have a standard type-1
extreme value distribution (Train 2009).
   Likewise, a binary logit model is selected to describe the escorting decision of households
(k = 1 escorting and k = 0 not escorting, Nq ), and the utility can be written as
                                             mqk = <U+03B3>k zqk + tqk .                                        (5)
   In this equation, mqk is the perceived utility for alternative k for household q, <U+03B3>k is the coef-
ficient vector, and zqk is the observed attribute vector. Moreover, tqk represents the error term
which is presumably type-1 extreme value distributed. Pursuant to utility maximisation theory,
a rational decision-maker would choose an alternative that is associated with the highest util-
ity. Hence, household q will choose alternative i and k, if the following condition in Equations
(6)–(9) preserves:
                              vqi = e* n - eqi .                                                         (6)
                                                                  
                             u* q = max(ßxqj + eqj ) = ln                e(ßxqj ) + e* n .               (7)
                                      j=i
                                     j<U+2208>Mq                           j=i
                                                                 j<U+2208>Mq
                            µqk = t * q - tqk .                                                          (8)
                                                                 
                            m* q = max(<U+03B3> zqj + tqj ) = ln                e(<U+03B3> zqj ) + t * n .             (9)
                                      j=k
                                     j<U+2208>Nq                         j=k
                                                                 j<U+2208>Nq
   Considering a logistic distribution, the independent probability for selecting alternatives i and
k can be obtained from the following cumulative density functions:
                               <U+239B>                             <U+239E>
                                                                                 1
                          Feqi <U+239D>ßxqi - ln          e(ßxqj ) <U+23A0> =                                       (10)
                                                                          -ßxqi +ln          e(ßxqj )
                                              j=i               1+e                    j=i
                              <U+239B>                             <U+239E>
                                                                                1
                        Ftqk <U+239D><U+03B3> zqk - ln          e(<U+03B3> zqj ) <U+23A0> =                                     . (11)
                                                                         -<U+03B3> zqk +ln        e(<U+03B3> zqj )
                                           j=k                 1+e                  j=k
   The probability of selecting i and k defined by Pq (i, k) can be approximated using a copula
function. Following Bhat and Eluru (2009), the general copula function can be written as
equation 12
                F(y1 , y2 ) = Pr(Y1 < y1 , Y2 < y2 ) = Pr(U1 < F1 (y1 ), U2 < F2 (y2 ))
                            = C<U+03B8> (u1 = F 1 (y1 ), u2 = F 2 (y2 ))                                      (12)
where F1 (.) and F2 (.) are marginal distributions and, C<U+03B8> (., .) is the relevant copula function and
<U+03B8> is the dependent parameter (see Sklar 1959).

280                                         A. Ermagun et al.
   Considering the association of the two probabilities of transportation mode choice and decision
of escorting by using a copula function, the desired maximum log-likelihood function can be
written as follows in equation 13:
                                          <U+239B>                               <U+239E>
                                      Q
                                             
                                LL =      <U+239D>            dqik log(Pq (i, k))<U+23A0> .                   (13)
                                      q=1    i<U+2208>Mq k<U+2208>Nq
   In this equation, for each mode i and each escort type k, if a decision-maker chooses mode
i and escort type k, then dqik is equal to 1 and otherwise takes a 0 value. In order to estimate
this model, the code is developed in the R statistical package (R Core Team 2013). <U+03B3>i and ßi as
the corresponding coefficients along with the six copula parameters <U+03B8> for escort-private, escort-
school bus, escort-public, escort-walk, non-escort-public, and non-escort-walk are estimated.
5.   Results
5.1. General discussion
To choose the appropriate copula model, four popular Archimedean variants, that is, Joe, Clay-
ton, Gumbel, and Frank, are examined and compared against the NL. To compare the general
goodness of fit of the developed models, the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) statistic is
used as different combinations of variables are used in the models (Trivedi and Zimmer 2007).
Equation (14) (Trivedi and Zimmer 2007) shows the general formulation for BIC, in which L is
the likelihood at convergence, k’ is the number of estimated parameters, and n is the number of
observations.
                                    BIC = -2 × ln(L) + k  × ln(n).                             (14)
   As per this equation, the lower the BIC statistic is, the better the model fits the data (Trivedi
and Zimmer 2007). In addition, this test collapses to a simple likelihood comparison test when
models have the same number of exogenous variables. Table 4 shows the BIC results for the
developed models. According to the BIC criterion, the Frank copula model performs better than
the other copula functions. The Frank copula model significantly outperformed the independent
model and the NL model, showing the importance of jointly considering these two decisions.
   Further joint models of escort decision and mode choice are estimated and reported. The cop-
ula dependency parameters (<U+03B8> ) indicate the extent of dependency between the decisions. Since
private car and school bus are regarded as full escorting, their dependency parameter with non-
escort is set to zero. All the other estimated dependency parameters deviate from zero, as the
t-value statistics for the copula model indicates. It should be noted that the sign of these coeffi-
cients differ among different copula formulations (Bhat and Eluru 2009). Based on the discussion
               Table 4.   BIC results in various models.
                                           Number of           Log-likelihood at
               Model type                  parameters            convergence       BIC
               Frank copula joint               26                 - 1909.96     4030.26
               Clayton copula joint             26                 - 2995.09     6200.52
               Gumbel copula joint              26                 - 2716.19     5642.72
               Joe copula joint                 26                 - 3064.28     6338.90
               Independent                      20                 - 3624.21     7410.22
               NL joint                         22                 - 2892.10     5962.18

                               Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                             281
provided in the methodology section, when the copula dependency parameter is positive (or neg-
ative), parameters that increase the likelihood of the travel mode decreases (or increases) the
likelihood of escorting and vice versa.
   To further emphasise the benefits of developing the joint copula model compared to the NL
model, the percentage for correctly predicted observations is compared. It was found that the
prediction power is 41.7% for the copula model and 30.9% for the NL model. Considering the
fact that six decisions are modelled in the NL mode, the NL model performs twice better than a
model that randomly selects one of the six outcomes, resulting in an accuracy rate of one over six
(almost 17%). The copula model enhances the prediction potential of the NL mode by another
additional 30%, which is a significant achievement.
5.2. NL model
A two-level NL model is developed (Table 5) in this study as a baseline for comparison. The
tree of the NL model is structured in a way that the upper level has two branches: escort and
non-escort. The escort and non-escort branches have, respectively, four and two alternatives
underneath. In a two-level NL, the IV parameters should be positive and less than one (Hen-
sher and Greene 2002). As shown in Table 5, the IV parameters of escort and non-escort are,
respectively, 0.63 and 0.75 and statistically different from 0 and 1, according to the Wald test.
5.3.   The Frank copula model
Table 6 presents the results for the Frank copula model among the examined copula models.
According to Table 6, gender and education level are among the student characteristics that
turned out to influence travel mode decision and escorting behaviour. As per previous stud-
ies (McDonald 2008b; Samimi and Ermagun 2012b), male students have less tendency to be
escorted than female students; as a result, males are less willing to use dependent modes such as
private cars. As expected, high school students are more willing to use independent modes such
as walking and public transportation. This can be explained given the fact that grown-up students
would rather use an independent lifestyle and consequently independent travel modes.
   Among socio-economic characteristics, household income, car ownership, and education level
are the most influential on transportation mode and escorting decisions. Families with higher lev-
els of income are more willing to use independent modes, especially school buses. Households
with a lower level of income, however, prefer independent modes such as walking and public
transportation, while escorting their children is less interesting. This can be explained by the fact
that a high-income household more easily considers paying for non-active modes such as school
buses. It has been declared (Ewing, Schroeer, and Greene 2004; Wen et al. 2007; Yarlagadda and
Srinivasan 2008) that car ownership considerably affects transportation mode choice decisions,
which implies escorting kids. In line with other studies (Vovsha and Petersen 2005; Samimi and
Ermagun 2012a) that showed households with two and more cars are more likely to use private
modes, we found that more cars available to a household dramatically increases the chance of
using private modes. Regarding the effect of parents’ education, the findings presented in Table 6
show that households with higher education levels prefer to escort their children more, and con-
sequently are less willing to use modes such as walking and public transportation. It should also
be noted that the household’s tendency for walking is higher than using public transportation
for those with higher education levels. The reason might be the awareness of such parents about
the advantages of walking for their children, including health benefits. Alternatively, it might be
due to their higher income which enables them to reside in places closer to the desirable schools
which then results in a shorter commute distance.

284                                        A. Ermagun et al.
   Population density, distance to school, and distance to the public transport station are all
important urban characteristics that have been taken into consideration in this study. Previous
studies (McDonald and Aalborg 2009; Mitra, Buliung, and Roorda 2010; Wilson et al. 2010)
confirmed that the longer the distance between home and school, the more desirable school bus
and private cars become. Due to the importance of the commute distance variable in urban pol-
icy-making and design, some studies (McMillan 2007; McDonald 2008a) have gone even further
by introducing a critical distance for using the walking mode. According to most of these studies
(McMillan 2007), within distances of less than 1.6 km, students are more willing to walk rather
than using other modes. We also found that students prefer the walking modes over others when
the walking distance is less than 1.6 km. Besides, the willingness of parents to escort the children
significantly reduces within this distance. On the other hand, the D_LWALKSCH variable shows
that parents in households who reside more than 1.6 km away from schools are more willing
to escort children or use school buses. Therefore, urban policy-makers and planners interested
in promoting active modes should note that decentralisation of schools may promote walking
modes (McDonald 2008a). Another land use variable which is examined for its impact on school
trip is access to public transit. The dummy variable D_WALKTRNT distinguishes households
whose residence distance is less than 800 metres from a public transportation station. Morency,
Trépanier, and Demers (2011) indicated that a more accessible transit network could encourage
students to take transit to school.
   Safety, comfort, traffic restrictions, reliability, and travel costs are some of parents’ concerns
which influence students’ transportation mode and escorting patterns. Our results provide evi-
dence that parents who are concerned about the en route safety of their kids persist on escorting
them. They are also less willing to use independent modes such as walking. Such parents prefer
school buses and private cars for their children’s school travels. Hence, enforcement programmes
such as ‘safe route to school’ (McDonald and Aalborg 2009) and ‘walk school bus’ (Staunton,
Hubsmith, and Kallins 2003) might be found to be effective in promoting active modes for par-
ents with high safety concerns. The coefficient of the traffic restrictions variable shows that the
tendency to escort decreases sharply for parents who reside in areas with traffic restrictions.
Moreover, these parents prefer to use public transit due to the comparatively better condition of
the transit system.
6. Policy implementation
This section presents a discussion on the influence of some of the explanatory variables on
mode choice and escorting decisions. These variables include vehicle ownership, access to pub-
lic transit, commute distance to school, and students’ safety. The results of the copula joint and
independent models will be compared to illustrate how emphasising on results of a misspecified
model can distort policy assessments. For this purpose, elasticities of some policy-sensitive vari-
ables are compared in Table 7. An elasticity value shows the percentage of change in the choice
probability resulting from a one percentage increase in the exogenous variable.
   Access to public transit is one of the substantial built environment variables having a tight
correlation with the utility of transit mode. As shown in Table 7, as accessibility to the tran-
sit system disintegrates, the chance of selecting the transit mode drops by 27%, whereas it
increases the chance of the private car use and school bus modes by respectively 1.5% and
4.7%. Model misspecification bias is notable for the accessibility indicator for the public trans-
port (D_WALKTRNT) variable with an elasticity value of - 34.3 in the independent model and
- 27% in the joint model.
   Commute distance to school is another exogenous variable affecting the travel mode, espe-
cially walking and biking. There has been a controversy among advocates of centralisation and

                               Transportmetrica A: Transport Science                              285
 Table 7. Elasticities for copula-based joint and independent models.
                                                Policy-sensitive variables
 Alternative    Model type NON_AUTO D_WALKTRNT D_WALKSCH D_LWALKSCH SAFETY
 Private            Joint         20.4              1.5            10.7        - 5.6         - 22.5
               Independent        36.1              2.4            29.9        - 0.4         - 22.0
 School bus         Joint         25.9              4.7           126.4       - 21.4         - 18.6
               Independent        39.8              4.9           135.9       - 18.7         - 40.7
 Public             Joint      - 21.1           - 27.2             70.5       - 13.5           20.9
               Independent     - 27.2           - 34.3             97.2       - 18.3           23.3
 Walk               Joint        - 4.4              5.6          - 43.3        167.3           50.5
               Independent     - 10.7               4.8          - 46.4        215.9           35.0
 Escort             Joint          –                –              77.0       - 12.8         - 22.7
               Independent         –                –              57.2       - 13.4         - 21.6
 Non-escort         Joint          –                –            - 34.8          34.1          42.3
               Independent         –                –            - 31.9          49.8          55.0
decentralisation of schools in recent decades (Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2008). Accord-
ing to the elasticity of D_LWALKSCH variable in the joint model, propensity of walking to school
will increase by 167% if a student lives closer than 1.6 km from school. Yet, this increase is about
40% in the independent model. This is a direct consequence of model misspecification that can
lead to an underestimation of the walking mode when decentralisation is promoted. Likewise,
having a school at greater than 1.6 km away from home reduces the chance of walking by 43%
and increases the chance of riding a school bus by 126%. It also increases the probability of
accompanying the student to school by 77%. These values are considerably different from those
estimated for the independent model.
   Among parental concerns, safety was found to be one of the major policy-sensitive factors
with a pivotal effect on active mode and public transit (Table 5). Elasticity of this variable shows
that addressing safety concerns can promote the propensity of walking and taking transit by 50%
and 21% respectively. Moreover, it reduces the likelihood of using a private car or riding a school
bus by respectively 22% and 19%, which is crucial for policy implications. Therefore, policy-
makers and city planners who try to encourage students to walk to school should find methods
to address the safety concerns of parents. Alternatives such as ‘Safe route to school’ (McDonald
and Aalborg 2009) and ‘walk school bus’(Staunton, Hubsmith, and Kallins 2003) are common
policies that have already been praised in this regard. The misspecification issue draws attention
when the joint and independent models are compared based on the elasticities estimated for the
safety variable.
   Finally, the elasticity of NON_AUTO shows that acquiring a car in families with no personal
vehicle can increase the probability of selecting the private car mode by 21%. Consequently,
the likelihood of walking and using public transit drops by 21% and 4% respectively. Due
to the rapid increase in car ownership and knowing its impact on school trip mode choice
behaviour, decision-makers should be aware of the adverse consequences, particularly on the
network mobility during the peak hours.
7. Summary and conclusion
This paper, as an early attempt, evaluated transportation mode choice decision and the way that
students are accompanied by their parents to school, in a joint modelling structure as it is believed
that these decisions are jointly made by parents. The joint decision-making was modelled using

286                                        A. Ermagun et al.
a NL structure and a copula-based discrete-discrete modelling formulation. Results showed that
the copula model provides a better fit to the data than the NL model.
   Results demonstrated that considering these two decisions in an independent way can mis-
lead the policy-related assessments. For example, the joint model showed that decreasing the
commute distance to less than 1.6 km can increase the propensity of walking to school by 1.67
times. However, this increase is underestimated by 0.4 times if the dependencies between the
decision are neglected. Two prevalent models were used to jointly model transportation mode
and escorting pattern: a NL model and a copula-based model.
   Recognising influential factors on the mode choice and escorting decisions is pivotal to
introduce effective policies that address school trip issues. In this study, a wide range of
socio-demographic, built environment, and parental concern variables were investigated. For
instance, high-income families, highly educated families, and those with private car were found
to have higher tendencies to use motorised modes. Furthermore, results illustrated that addressing
parental concerns such as safety can increase the share of walking mode to school by 50%.
   This study also has some restrictions that can be resolved in future studies:
   • Employing a walkability index could enhance the model and make the predictions more
       realistic.
   • Elementary school students were not studied due to their different behaviour in the school
       trip.
   • As several types of escorting patterns were asked in the questionnaire, the escorting
       decisions can be modelled in more detail in future works.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to express their profound gratitude and deep regards to Shahrbanou Khaniki for her kind
assistance in data collection. We also would like to thank the assistance of three anonymous reviewers
whose comments were helpful in revising the article.
References
Alemu, D. D., and J. G. Tsutsumi. 2011. “Determinants and Spatial Variability of After-School Travel by
     Teenagers.” Journal of Transport Geography 19 (4): 876–881.
Andersen, L. B., M. Harro, L. B. Sardinha, K. Froberg, U. Ekelund, S. Brage, and S. A. Anderssen. 2006.
     “Physical Activity and Clustered Cardiovascular Risk in Children: A Cross-Sectional Study (The
     European Youth Heart Study).” Lancet 368 (9532): 299–304.
Bhat, C. R., and N. Eluru. 2009. “A Copula-Based Approach to Accommodate Residential Self-Selection
     Effects in Travel Behavior Modeling.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 43 (7): 749–
     765.
Bierlaire, M. 2006. “A Theoretical Analysis of the Cross-Nested Logit Model.” Annals of Operations
     Research 144 (1): 287–300.
Clayton, D. G. 1978. “A Model for Association in Bivariate Life Tables and its Application in Epi-
     demiological Studies of Familial Tendency in Chronic Disease Incidence.” Biometrika 65 (1):
     141–151.
Cooper, A. R., L. B. Andersen, N. Wedderkopp, A. S. Page, and K. Froberg. 2005. “Physical Activity Levels
     of Children Who Walk, Cycle, or are Driven to School.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 29
     (3): 179–184.
De Jong, G., and M. Ben-Akiva. 2007. “A Micro-Simulation Model of Shipment Size and Transport Chain
     Choice.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 41 (9): 950–965.
Deka, D. 2013. “An Explanation of the Relationship Between Adults’ Work Trip Mode and Children’s
     School Trip Mode Through the Heckman Approach.” Journal of Transport Geography 31 (1): 54–63.

