S108                                Poster Abstracts / Journal of Transport & Health 5 (2017) S84–S114


There was little assessment of how these interventions could impact on health inequalities. All studies reported
decreases in GHG emissions as a result of their interventions; however methods to assess emission changes
varied in robustness. Health benefits reported from the studies included modest increases in physical activity (for
example an average increase of two to three minutes a day walking for transport purposes) and reductions in
mortality from air pollution. Study quality, with one exception, was poor.
Conclusions: Research quality urgently needs to improve, as does the breadth of the types of interventions
studied. There are exciting opportunities for innovative study designs and methodologies to answer research
questions in this important area. The need for public health practitioners to work more closely with the
transport sector is paramount.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.268




Case Study/Practitioner 2159

Active School Travel the Associations between Perceptions of Road Safety and Active Travel for
School Children and Their Parents - a Health Needs Assessment
                                      n
Rob Howard, FFPH, MPH, BSc (Hons)

Leicestershire County Council, Leicestershire, United Kingdom



Background: This Health Needs Assessment focuses on children aged 5–15 years old who attend primary or
secondary school in Leicestershire and Rutland (maintained, free and academy). The aim was to understand
the perceptions of road safety and road traffic injuries associated with active school travel and how closely
these match the real risk in terms of road traffic accidents occurring on the school commute and the benefits
in terms of increased physical activity in children.
Methods: An epidemiological review and literature review of national and local data was undertaken using
information regarding demography, active school travel, walk time to schools, police reported accidents,
physical activity and obesity. Stakeholder views were gathered through an electronic active school travel
survey and qualitative focus groups with schools in Leicestershire and Rutland. Qualitative focus group ses-
sions took place in four schools across Leicestershire and Rutland (2 primary, 2 secondary) with a total of 13
teachers, 48 students and 21 parents taking part.
Results: A large proportion of primary school pupils in Leicestershire and Rutland potentially could travel to
school actively based on walking times less than 30 minutes. However this proportion is reduced for sec-
ondary schools, particularly in Rutland, where mixed mode transport may be necessary.
   Focus groups and an online survey of schools identified a number of barriers and enablers involved in active
school travel. The main barriers included the distance, weather, attitudes, safety, and time logistics. Enablers
included awareness, attitudes of staff students and pupils, logistics and facilities, travel share schemes, school
travel plans and sharing good practice.
   Safety perceptions of children who responded to the travel survey were higher for their current mode used to
get to school than other modes, which may prevent uptake. The literature review highlighted evidence for a
number of effective interventions and suggests that a programme of work will be required to change school travel
behaviour and increase active travel mode choice. A variety of interventions are provided currently across Lei-
cestershire and Rutland, however awareness, capacity, access and future resources are variable and uncertain.
Conclusion and Recommendations:        From the evidence reviewed and the gaps identified a number of re-
commendations are made. A multiagency group including transport, public health, schools and safety partners
as a minimum should be convened who are responsible for developing a policy on active school travel to
address the policy recommendations. There are further commissioning recommendations for schools, local
authorities, CCGs and the LLR Road safety partnership to consider.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.05.269

