                                                     Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


                                                         Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                Journal of Transport & Health
                                              journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jth




Implications of attending the closest school on adolescents’
physical activity and car travel in Dunedin, New Zealand
Michael Keall a, *, Debbie Hopkins b, Kirsten Coppell a, Susan Sandretto a,
Enrique Garcia Bengoechea c, John Spence d, Gordon Wilson e, Sandra Mandic a
a
  University of Otago, New Zealand
b
  Oxford University, UK
c
  University of Limerick, Ireland
d
  University of Alberta, Canada
e
  Dunedin Secondary Schools’ Partnership, Dunedin, New Zealand




A R T I C L E I N F O                                  A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                              Background: Home-to-school distances and the need for students to be driven to/from school may
School zoning                                          limit adolescents’ physical activity levels. School choice and school zoning policies can influence
Adolescents                                            rates of active transport to/from school, and traffic volumes during school commuting times. This
Active travel to school
                                                       study aimed to quantify the effects of adolescents’ enrolment in the closest school or not, on
Physical activity
Trip chaining
                                                       private vehicle use and adolescents’ physical activity levels in Dunedin city, New Zealand.
                                                       Methods: New Zealand Travel Survey data (2003–2013; 2493 Dunedin respondents) were ana­
                                                       lysed to examine school-travel related private motorised trips. Dunedin-specific data from ado­
                                                       lescents (from six Dunedin non-integrated public schools without school zoning) were analysed
                                                       including self-reported survey data on school travel modes (797 adolescents), distance to the
                                                       current and closest schools (797 adolescents) and accelerometer-measured moderate-to-vigorous
                                                       intensity physical activity (MVPA) (121 adolescents).
                                                       Results: During the school commute time (8–9 am and 3–4 pm), an estimated 11.5% of car trips
                                                       (95% CI 7.8%–16.8%) and 12.5% of car distance driven (95% CI 8.8%–17.7%) were related to
                                                       secondary-school travel with approximately half of these involving trip-chaining. Compared to
                                                       adolescents living beyond cycling distance (>4 km) from their current school, adolescents living
                                                       within walkable distance (<U+FFFD>2.25 km) and cyclable distance (>2.25-<U+FFFD>4 km) accumulated an
                                                       additional 12.1 min (95% CI 7.0 to 17.2) and 6.1 min (95%CI 1.0 to 11.2) of daily MVPA during
                                                       the school commute time, respectively. If adolescents currently enrolled at a distant school were
                                                       to attend the closest school, they could accrue an additional 3.4 min MVPA during the 2-h school
                                                       commute time period and school travel-related private car trips would be reduced by 7%.
                                                       Conclusions: In Dunedin, New Zealand, modest reductions in private vehicle traffic, particularly
                                                       around schools, and increases in adolescents’ MVPA during the school commute period would be
                                                       expected if all adolescents attended the closest school.




 * Corresponding author.
    E-mail addresses: Michael.Keall@otago.ac.nz (M. Keall), debbie.hopkins@ouce.ox.ac.uk (D. Hopkins), Kirsten.Coppell@otago.ac.nz (K. Coppell),
Susan.Sandretto@otago.ac.nz (S. Sandretto), enrique.garcia@ul.ie (E.G. Bengoechea), jc.spence@ualberta.ca (J. Spence), gordon.wilson@dssp.org.
nz (G. Wilson), Sandra.Mandic@otago.ac.nz (S. Mandic).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2020.100900
Received 21 November 2019; Received in revised form 19 May 2020; Accepted 18 June 2020
Available online 17 July 2020
2214-1405/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

M. Keall et al.                                                                                     Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


1. Background

    Physical inactivity among adolescents is a common health issue worldwide (Kohl et al., 2012), including in New Zealand (Smith
et al., 2018). Travelling to school by car reduces the opportunities for adolescents to engage in physical activity. However, rates of
adolescents travelling to and from school using private cars have increased in many high-income countries (McDonald, 2007). In
Aotearoa New Zealand (hereafter referred to as NZ), rates of car-based transport to high schools have increased from 21% in
1989/1990 to 32% in 2010–2014 (Ministry of Transport, 2015a). Low levels of active transport to and/or from school (ATS) are
concerning, given the established connections between ATS and health (Faulkner et al., 2009).
    Adolescents using ATS have higher levels of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) compared to their peers who rely solely
on motorised transport to school (Saksvig et al., 2007; Simons et al., 2017), even if active transport is combined with motorised
transport within a single journey (Kek et al., 2019). In addition, relative to ATS, travelling to school by car increases traffic congestion
around school start/finish times, increases carbon and particulate emissions, contributes to noise pollution, and increases road injury
risk (Maizlish et al., 2013). Travelling to and/or from school by car may also have long-term consequences since transport habits
established during adolescence may carry over into adulthood (Simons et al., 2017).
    Distance from home to school is the strongest predictor of ATS (Ikeda et al., 2018; McDonald, 2007). School choice policies that do
not require adolescents to enrol in their closest school are likely to contribute to reduced rates of ATS, as school choice increases
distances children and adolescents travel to school (He and Giuliano, 2018; Mandic et al., 2017c). Indeed, higher rates of ATS among
students who enrolled at a local school compared to a more distant school have been reported in different countries where school
choice policies are in place, including the United States (Marshall et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2012), England (Van Ristell et al., 2013) and
NZ (Mandic et al., 2017c). In Dunedin, NZ – our case study city – adolescents who enrolled in the closest school had three times higher
rates of walking as a part of their journey to school, five times higher rates of using ATS only and lower rates of reliance solely on
motorised transport to school compared to adolescents who did not enrol in the closest school (Mandic et al., 2017c). Another
consideration, at least in NZ, is urban adolescents’ ongoing preference for car-based transport and reported intentions to learn to drive
(Hopkins et al., 2019).
    While school zoning policy that requires students to attend their closest school has the potential to increase adolescents’ physical
activity levels by increasing rates of ATS, assumptions underlying the potential benefits of this policy require closer scrutiny. For
instance, for many adolescents, travel to school behaviours are related to wider family travel practices. Parents and caregivers may
chain trips together, for example, dropping off and/or picking a child at school on their way to and/or from another destination. This
practice is known as ‘trip chaining’, with small segments combined into a larger ‘trip’, which is usually anchored at home or work
(Islam and Habib, 2012). Motorised car-based transport is usually the preferred mode for trip chaining, as it offers greater flexibility
than public transport modes, and greater speed than active modes (Daisy et al., 2018; Primerano et al., 2008), even for shorter dis­
tances, which would be considered ‘walkable’ (Carver et al., 2013).
    The implication is that adolescents may be transported to school as part of a ‘chain’, or sequence of connected trips, with home to
school representing only one part.
    Trip chaining is not homogenous, but takes multiple temporal and spatial forms; and the more complex the series of trips becomes,
the more likely that preferred travel mode options are flexible and convenient (Hensher and Reyes, 2000 p.341). In primary school
children, adult accompaniment and longer onward distances (such as a parent continuing to a more distant workplace) in a trip chain
were associated with lower rates of ATS, suggesting that both the chain itself and the distance involved presented an important barrier
to ATS (Carver et al., 2019). Buliung et al. (2011) found that weather, convenience and chained activities (i.e. driving children to
school en-route to work) were the most difficult barriers to overcome. While weather is likely to have temporal dimensions (e.g. vary
by day, month and/or season), convenience and trip chaining are likely to be more sustained reasons for choosing private motor




Fig. 1. Simplified influence diagram relating distance to school with moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical activity (MVPA) minutes during
school commute time, mediated by whether the trip to school was active (ATS) or not.

                                                                     2

M. Keall et al.                                                                                       Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


vehicle travel over active travel. As distance to school increases, parents more frequently report that the convenience of driving ad­
olescents to school as part of trip-chaining practices is one of the barriers to ATS (Mandic et al., 2020).
   The research presented in this paper quantifies the effects of adolescents’ school enrolment (i.e. closest school or not) on traffic
volumes, and MVPA of adolescents in the city of Dunedin, NZ. Underlying the analysis is the recognition that travel to school mode
choice is part of a complex system (Macmillan et al., 2020) characterised by many factors interacting in often changing ways affected
by other features of the system (e.g. school zoning policy, urban design, public transport infrastructure, adolescent and familial
behavioural norms) (Pont et al., 2009; Spence and Lee, 2003). We examine aspects of this complex relationship through an investi­
gation of trip chaining behaviours in the trip to/from school along with modelling of the associations between home-to-school distance
and MVPA. Key to this latter analysis is the theorised relationship between distance to school and mode choice for the trip to school,
represented in a simplified form by Fig. 1. This is the basis on which we estimate the associations between distance to school and MVPA
minutes during school commute time mediated by mode choice and influenced by other factors, only some of which can be modelled.

2. Methods

2.1. Setting

   Dunedin (population: 126,000) is the second-largest city in the South Island of NZ and home to NZ’s oldest university. The
multiethnic population (9.3% Maori, 3.2% Pacific peoples, 7.8% Asian, and 2.9% other ethnicities) has a large number of tertiary
students (Statistics New Zealand, 2018). Topographically, Dunedin is characterised by a harbour surrounded by hills with many
suburbs reaching 200 m above sea level. The city has 12 secondary schools, none of which are private. The six non-integrated public
schools without school zoning were included in this analysis (three co-educational, two single sex boys and one single sex girls’ school).
Four integrated/special character schools1 (in most cases based on religion) and two with school zoning were excluded.

2.2. New Zealand household travel survey (NZHTS) data

    Dunedin-specific NZHTS data (Ministry of Transport, 2007) collected throughout the year between mid-2003 and mid-2013 from
adolescent drivers and adults transporting school students (age 12–18 years) as car passengers were analysed. We examined trips made
both before and after the home-school trip to explore whether the car trip purpose was only related to transporting adolescents to
school or involved travelling to other destinations (i.e., trip chaining). The number of participants in the annual national survey of
travel behaviour from Dunedin each year was relatively small (range: 111–472 respondents/year). Therefore, eleven years of data to
reduce the variability in the estimates was required. Data on adolescent travel to/from school studied here consisted of 152 trips
reported from 40 households.
    The survey data were clustered within meshblocks, the primary sampling units (each approximately the size of a city block), and
then within households subsampled from the meshblocks. Detailed travel behaviour data for two specified days of the year were
collected via face-to-face interviews, and travel diaries kept by the participants. The annual response rate was 65%–70% (Ministry of
Transport, 2007).

2.3. BEATS study data

    Adolescents from all 12 secondary schools in Dunedin city participated in the Built Environment and Active Transport to School:
BEATS Study in 2014–2015 (Mandic et al., 2015, 2016). Details on the recruitment of schools and adolescents have been described
elsewhere (Mandic et al., 2016). Briefly, adolescents were recruited through their schools and they provided written consent before
taking part in the study. For those aged under 16 years, parents consented following opt-out or opt-in procedures based on the school’s
preference. The study was approved by the University of Otago Human Ethics Committee (Reference 13/203).
    A total of 1780 adolescents completed the BEATS Student Survey online during class time, supervised by research staff (Mandic
et al., 2016). The survey included questions about sociodemographic characteristics, home address, transport to school habits, reasons
for school choice and whether adolescents enrolled in their closest secondary school (Mandic et al., 2016, 2018c). Socioeconomic
status was measured by the New Zealand index of deprivation (NZDep) (Salmond and Crampton, 2012), derived from Census data
collected at the level of meshblocks, which are the smallest geographic units for which statistical data is reported in NZ, with a median
size of around 90 people (Salmond and Crampton, 2012). This study included analysis of adolescent survey data from 797 Dunedin
adolescents (mean age: 15.2 years; 51.4% boys) who attended one of six non-integrated public secondary schools without school
zoning at the time of data collection (Fig. 2). An example of an invalid survey was inconsistent travel to school responses where
students nominated several different modes of transport as being used “most of the time” or “all of the time”.

2.3.1. Home-to-school distance data
   Using student home address data self-reported in the BEATS Student Survey, distance from home to school was determined using


  1
    In New Zealand, integrated schools are formerly private schools that have become part of the state system. They have a special character,
philosophical or religious, but teach the New Zealand curriculum. See http://parents.education.govt.nz/primary-school/schooling-in-nz/different-
types-of-primary-and-intermediate-schools/.

                                                                       3

M. Keall et al.                                                                                        Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900




        Fig. 2. Flowchart of adolescents’ completion of BEATS student survey and accelerometer assessments for inclusion in this analysis.


Geographic Information Systems shortest path network analysis, as described previously (Mandic et al., 2016). For each adolescent,
home-to-school distance was calculated for their current school and their closest of the six non-integrated schools without school
zoning, taking into account participants’ gender and the co-education status of schools (Mandic et al., 2017d). The closest school was
determined based on comparing the distance to the current school and closest school for each participant (Mandic et al., 2017d).
Home-to-school distances were categorised as ‘walking distance’ (<U+FFFD>2.25 km), ‘cycling distance’ (>2.25 and <U+FFFD> 4.0 km) and ‘beyond
cycling distance’ (>4.0 km) based on previously published work for reasonable walking (Pocock et al., 2019) and cycling (Nelson et al.,
2008) distances to school for adolescents.

2.3.2. Transport to school
    Adolescents self-reported their transport to school habits in the BEATS student survey by responding to a question “How do you
usually travel to school?” for different transport modes with response categories “never”, “rarely”, “sometimes”, “most of the time” and
“all of the time” (Mandic et al., 2017b). Dominant modes of transport to school (used “most/all of the time”) and multi-modal transport
were used to classify adolescents into ATS (walking, cycling, or riding a non-motorised scooter “most/all of the time”), motorised
transport or mixed modes (Mandic et al., 2017b).

2.3.3. Accelerometer-measured physical activity
    A subgroup of adolescents wore an accelerometer (ActiGraph, GT3XPlus, Pensacola, FL, USA) above the right hip for seven
consecutive days, as described previously (Kek et al., 2019). Briefly, participants were given their device and verbal and written in­
structions at school. To promote compliance, participants were given a log to record the wear/removal times and reasons, and sent
e-mails/text reminders to complete the log. Accelerometer data were downloaded using ActiGraph software (ActiLife 6) and stored in
10-s epochs to detect short bursts of vigorous PA. The wear time validity was set at <U+FFFD>5 days with <U+FFFD>10 h/day (inclusive of <U+FFFD>3 school
days and <U+FFFD>1 weekend day) (Corder et al., 2008; Riddoch et al., 2004). The wear time validity for one hour before school (08:00–09:00
h) and one hour after school (15:00–16:00 h) was set at <U+FFFD>75% of wear time for each period (Kek et al., 2019). Data were analysed by
MeterPlus Data Analysis Service (MeterPlus, San Diego, CA, USA) in 2016 using Evenson cut points (Evenson et al., 2008) and included
total minutes of accumulated physical activity. Non-activity periods were determined based on 20-min or more bouts of inactivity
(Cain et al., 2013). Accelerometer-derived variables included average physical activity (light, moderate, vigorous, MVPA) and
sedentary time per day, school day and weekend day and one hour before and after school, accounting for school-specific start/end
times. Participants who accumulated <U+FFFD>60 min of MVPA/day on all valid days met the minimum PA guidelines (Tremblay et al., 2016).
Data from 121 adolescents with valid accelerometer data who attended one of the six non-integrated public secondary schools without
school zoning were analysed (Fig. 2). In comparison with the students who completed the survey, a higher proportion of students who
wore an accelerometer were NZ European (73% vs. 83%) and a lower proportion were of Ma         <U+FFFD>ori descent (15% vs. 5%) whereas no
difference was found in age, gender, neighbourhood level deprivation or main mode of transport to school between the two groups


                                                                        4

M. Keall et al.                                                                                               Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


(data not presented).


2.4. Data analysis

2.4.1. Trip chaining (NZHTS data)
    Using the NZHTS detailed travel data, home-school car trips were analysed based on whether they were chained to other trips/
destinations or not, using the labels shown in Table 1. As this analysis was concerned with the impact of the private motor vehicles
themselves, trips by private motor vehicles carrying more than one secondary school student were counted as single trips.
    When a special trip was made involving the driver taking their school-aged passenger to school and then returning home (or driving
from home to pick up the adolescent before returning home), trips were labelled as “home” to signal the principal origin or destination
of the trip (apart from the school).

2.4.2. Models to estimate proportion of all private motor vehicle travel
   Using NZHTS school-related car trip data, models were fitted using SAS (SAS Institute Inc, 2014) to estimate rates of private motor
vehicle trips per trip purpose using a generalised linear model with a log link function and binomial distribution, called log-binomial
regression by Blizzard and Hosmer (2006). Generalised Estimating Equations were used to specify the clustered data structure (within
meshblocks, as described above) to estimate confidence intervals appropriately.

2.4.3. Time spent in MVPA regression models
    BEATS Study accelerometer data for adolescents’ time spent in MVPA during the school commute period (8–9 am and 3–4 pm) was
approximately normally distributed (the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test goodness-of-fit test for the normal distribution had a P-val­
ue>0.15). Therefore, these data could be modelled appropriately using the SAS procedure GENMOD (SAS Institute Inc, 2014) using the
identity link function that fits an additive model. The outcome variable MVPA minutes during the school commute time was fitted,
with explanatory variables: enrolled at closest school or not, distance from home to school, gender, ethnicity, NZDep, and age (as
shown in Table 4).
    For the explanatory variables, the average school day MVPA minutes accumulated during the school commute time were estimated
relative to a reference level (set as zero). The intercept value estimates the mean MVPA minutes for adolescents who were classified by
all the reference levels of the variables (enrolled at closest school; more than 4 km from home to school; etc).

3. Results

    Table 2 shows the results of NZHTS analysis of school-related private motor vehicle trips in Dunedin where adolescents were either
driven or drove themselves between home and school. Half of the car trips related to school travel were home-school-home trips. Those
trips accounted for 43% of distance of all school travel-related car trips with a mean home-to-school distance of 4.8 km (which is 0.8
km less than the mean distance for all school-related car trips in Dunedin).
    These school travel-related private motor vehicle trips were then analysed in the context of all private motor vehicle travel
occurring in the periods before and after school, on all weekdays excluding the month of January, which is a school summer holiday
month in NZ. The results showed that approximately 11.5% of private motor vehicle trips (95% CI 7.8%–16.8%) and 12.5% of distance
driven by private motor vehicles (95% CI 8.8%–17.7%) of all Dunedin private car trips that either occurred (started and finished)
during the 8am–9am or during the 3pm–4pm periods were related to adolescents’ travel between school and home.
    Using the BEATS Study data, among Dunedin adolescents who did not attend their closest school, 42% lived >4 km from any
school, whereas 36% lived within 2.25 km (walkable distance) and 22% lived within 2.25–4 km (cycling distance) from the closest
school (Table 3).
    As the distance to school increased, the rates of ATS decreased from 62% within walkable distance to 24% within cycling distance
and 2% beyond cycling distance to school with the corresponding increase in the proportion of private motor vehicle travel to and from
school (Fig. 3).
    A minority of the estimated parameters were statistically significant (with 95% CIs not including zero) in explaining time spent in
MVPA over the two hours of school commute time when the other variables were controlled for. The strongest predictor was home-to-

                     Table 1
                     Classification of school-related car trip types (NZHTS data analysis).
                      Trip type                                         Description

                      Home trip                                         Home <U+2192> School <U+2192> Home
                      Work trip                                         Home <U+2192> School <U+2192> Work or Work <U+2192> School <U+2192> Home
                      Other trip                                        Home <U+2192> School <U+2192> Other or Other <U+2192> School <U+2192> Home
                      Self-driven trip                                  Home <U+2192> School or School <U+2192> Home (Adolescent drove self)
                      Not household driver tripa                        Details unknown (no data on driver’s travel before or after)
                       a
                         If the driver with an adolescent passenger on their way to/from school was not a participant in the
                     NZHTS survey (i.e., not members of the surveyed household), then no other details were available about
                     prior or subsequent destinations apart from the adolescents’ journey to or from school.

                                                                          5

M. Keall et al.                                                                                                     Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


Table 2
NZ Travel Survey data for Dunedin (2003–2013) for secondary school-related journeys by private motor vehicles.
  Trip type                          Proportions of trips [weighted % (n)]               Proportions of trip distance             Mean home-to-school distance

  Homea                              50% (68)                                            43%                                      4.8 km
  Worka                              12% (23)                                            9%                                       3.9 km
  Othera                             15% (21)                                            10%                                      3.6 km
  Not household driverb              16% (28)                                            33%                                      11.4 km
  Drive self                         6% (12)                                             6%                                       5.7 km
  Overall                            100% (152)                                          100%                                     5.6 km
  a
      Subsequent destination (for trips to school) or prior trip origin (for trips home) of the driver. These were unknown for non-household drivers.
  b
      Drivers not members of surveyed households provided no information on trip chaining.



Table 3
Proportion of Dunedin adolescents by home-to-school distance categories and enrolment at closest school or not (Source: BEATS Student Survey,
2014/2015).
                                              Students enrolled in the closest school [% (n)]            Students NOT enrolled in the closest school [% (n)]
  Distance from home to school
                                              Actual school        Closest school                        Actual school        Closest school

  Within walkable distance (<2.25 km)         64% (260)            64% (260)a                            6% (24)              36% (139)
  Cyclable distance (2.25–4 km)               19% (78)             19% (78)a                             24% (95)             22% (86)
  Beyond cyclable distance (>4 km)            17% (71)             17% (71)a                             69% (269)            42% (163)
  TOTAL                                       100% (409)           100% (409)                            100% (388)           100% (388)
  a
      Home-to-school distance data for students enrolled at the closest school are the same for the actual and closest school.




Fig. 3. Percentage of adolescents travelling to and from school on most or all days using active travel to school (ATS) or private motor vehicle in
relation to distance from home to school (Source: BEATS Student Survey, 2014/2015). Note that mixed modes (combination of active and motorised
transport) are not represented here.


school distance. The parameter estimates shown in Table 4 show students living within a walkable and cyclable distance from school
accumulated additional 12.1 min of MVPA/school day (95%CI 7.0 to 17.2) and 6.1 min of MVPA/school day (95%CI 1.0 to 11.2),
respectively, during the school commute period compared to those living beyond cyclable distance to school (>4 km).
    Only two other variables approached statistical significance: M<U+FFFD>     aori ethnicity and the age group 14–15 years compared to the
reference group (16–19 years). M<U+FFFD>    aori students accumulated eight MVPA minutes more during the school commute time than NZ
European adolescents, and 14-15-year- olds accumulated approximately five additional minutes of MVPA compared to 16-19-year-
olds. The usual mode of transport was not included in the model, even though the data were available, as we were interested in
the direct effect of distance to school on physical activity levels that arise (presumably) from ATS as represented diagrammatically in
Fig. 1. An additional interaction term was fitted (parameter estimates not shown) to see whether there was a different association
between the categories of home-school distance and daily MVPA minutes accumulated during the school commute period for those


                                                                                6

M. Keall et al.                                                                                          Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


      Table 4
      Estimated coefficients from modelling BEATS data on the average number of minutes of MVPA in the hour before and hour after school
      combined.
         Variable                                               Category                                          Parameter estimate (95% CI)
                                                                a
         Intercept                                                                                                8.7 (1.5, 16)
         Enrolled at closest school?                            No                                                4.6 (0.1, 9.1)
                                                                Yes                                               0 (Reference)
         Distance home to school                                Walkable (<U+FFFD>2.25 km)                               12.1 (7.0, 17.2)
                                                                Cyclable (>2.25–4.0 km)                           6.1 (1.0, 11.2)
                                                                >4.0 km                                           0 (Reference)
         Gender                                                 Male                                              1.4 ( 2.3, 5)
                                                                Female                                            0 (Reference)
         Ethnicity                                              M<U+FFFD>aori                                            8.4 ( 0.1, 16.9)
                                                                Other                                             0.1 ( 5.3, 5.6)
                                                                New Zealand European                              0 (Reference)
         Age                                                    12–13 years                                       1.7 ( 3.4, 6.8)
                                                                14–15 years                                       5.1 (0.1, 10.2)
                                                                16–19 years                                       0 (Reference)
         Neighbourhood deprivation score                        1-2 (least deprived)                              0.1 ( 5.9, 6.1)
                                                                3–4                                               1.4 ( 4.7, 7.5)
                                                                5–6                                               2.0 ( 4.2, 8.2)
                                                                7–8                                                 1.5 ( 8.3, 5.2)
                                                                9-10 (most deprived)                              0 (Reference)
        a
          The intercept provides an estimate for average minutes of MVPA for students in the combined set of reference categories: enrolled at
      closest school; more than 4 km from home to school; NZ European; residing in most deprived area quintile.


enrolled at the closest school compared to those not enrolled at the closest school, but there was no evidence that these associations
were different (P ¼ 0.32).
    The parameter estimates regarding home-to-school distance in Table 4 were combined with the estimates presented in Table 3 to
model the additional daily minutes of MVPA during the school commute period per student that might accrue if the students attended
the closest school (and perhaps used ATS at a higher rate because of the reduced distance to school). It was estimated that, on average,
each student not enrolled at their closest school would undertake an additional 3.4 daily minutes of MVPA during the school commute
time if they were to attend their closest school. Similarly, if home-to-school distance is assumed to be the main determinant of private
motor vehicle usage in the trip to and/or from school, then if these students were to enrol at their closest school, there would be a 7%
city-wide reduction in private motor vehicle trips to and/or from school overall.

4. Discussion

    This study examined MVPA levels during the school commute period amongst adolescents in relation to distance to school and their
attendance or not at the closest school. Adolescents living within walking distance from school (<U+FFFD>2.25 km) accumulated an additional
11.5 min of MVPA daily during school commute period (95%CI 6.6–16.5) and those living beyond walkable distance, but within a
cyclable distance (>2.25–4.0 km) accumulated an additional 5.5 min of MVPA daily during the school commute period (95%CI
0.6–10.4) compared to those living beyond cyclable distance to their school (>4 km). This accumulation of additional MVPA during
the school commute time appeared to be eight minutes greater for M<U+FFFD>      aori students compared with the other ethnic groups.
    Cycling is an uncommon mode of transport to school for NZ adolescents, constituting only about 3% of such trips nationally
(Ministry of Transport, 2015b). The current analysis of ATS rates by distance to school categories shows that although Dunedin ad­
olescents living beyond walkable but within cycling distance to their school (>2.25–4.0 km) are theoretically able to cycle to school,
the rates of ATS and cycling to school within that distance are very low suggesting more complex factors at play. In the NZ context,
cycling to school is perceived as less safe by both adolescents and their parents, and receives less social and infrastructure support
compared to walking to school (Mandic et al., 2017b, 2020). A complex range of factors contributes to adolescents’ and their parents’
perceptions of safety of cycling in NZ, including features and perceptions of the built environment, traffic safety, previous cycling
experiences and adolescents’ cycling skills and on-road experiences (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017; Mandic et al., 2017a, 2018a) and such
perceptions differ based on how far adolescents live from their school (Mandic et al., 2020). Parental perceptions of time constraints
associated with cycling to school and cycling-related safety concerns became more pronounced with an increase in home-to-school
distance (Mandic et al., 2020). In additional, natural environment factors (e.g., hills and inclement weather), school factors (e.g.,
school uniforms and school bag weight) and as well as policy factors represent barriers to cycling to school even when adolescents live
within reasonable distance for cycling to school (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017; Mandic et al., 2017b, 2018b). Taken together, a complex
set of factors influences NZ adolescents’ and their parents’ decisions related to cycling to school, even when they live within reasonable
distance to school, which may contribute to preferences for private vehicle travel often involving trip chaining, as observed in this
study.
    To quantify the effects of adolescents’ enrolment in the closest school (or not), we examined the role of private vehicles in the trip to
and from school for adolescents in Dunedin, NZ. Such trips play an important role in the traffic of the city, particularly in the immediate
neighbourhood of schools. During the school commute time (assessed in this study as the hour immediately before school and the hour


                                                                           7

M. Keall et al.                                                                                  Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


after school), approximately 11.5% of trips (95% CI 7.8%–16.8%) and 12.5% of distance (95% CI 8.8%–17.7%) were for the purpose of
adolescents’ travel between school and home. As only 0.3% of the NZ light passenger vehicle fleet is electric (New Zealand Ministry of
Transport, 2019), this implies that approximately 12% of emissions from light passenger vehicles is also associated with the secondary
school travel in Dunedin. Given that this travel is occurring at times when many other children, adolescents and adults are also
travelling either as pedestrians or cyclists, it is likely that motorised travel between home and school is associated with considerably
more than 12% of road traffic risk.
    The extent to which such motorised travel is replaceable by active modes is difficult to deduce. The average distance between home
and school for students using private motor vehicles was 5.6 km, a sufficient distance to require a reasonably dedicated cyclist,
particularly in cities like Dunedin, where the terrain is hilly, the weather often inclement, and the cycling infrastructure is generally
poor. A large proportion of the motorised school travel trips may have occurred anyway, as they were chained to other trips with
different purposes in our analysis of the NZHTS data. Around 44% of these private motor vehicle journeys and 51% of distance
travelled were for school travel-related trips. However, our analysis could not examine the trip chaining practices of drivers from
different households driving surveyed students, whose trips made up around one third of the total distance travelled in private motor
vehicle travel between home and school.
    Health-related behaviours and travel mode choices have been shown to be associated with individual socio-economic factors in NZ
(Denny et al., 2016; Utter et al., 2011) and elsewhere (e.g., Beenackers et al., 2012). However, there was no evidence (P ¼ 0.82) of any
association between socioeconomic deprivation and minutes of MVPA in the hour before and after school in this study.
    School zoning is a policy that can potentially reduce car travel, with its associated harms, as well as facilitate ATS, with its
associated health benefits (Mandic et al., 2017c). School zoning policy in NZ gives students the right to attend a school that is within
their geographical zone (Ministry of Education, 2009). This is complicated by school choice, where students may elect to enrol in
another school thereby increasing the distance to travel each day. In response to school zoning policies, wealthy parents may choose to
live in neighbourhoods with “good” schools, an option that will be less available to lower socioeconomic groups (Thrupp, 2007).
Although some additional MVPA accumulated during the school commute period would be expected for students living closer to school
because they are able to walk or cycle to school more readily, the current analysis does have limitations in inferring benefits arising
from school zoning for secondary schools. In the population we studied, those students not attending the closest school may be
different from those attending the closest school in terms of travel mode preferences and related demands on travel, such as work
patterns (Mandic et al., 2017c). Most importantly, compared to those who attend the closest school, students not attending the closest
school tend to live further from any school. Further, while this study did not examine these factors, the decision made by parents and
children about which school to attend might be influenced by other transport arrangements, requirements of the family or social
factors (Mandic et al., 2018d). Recent findings show that over two thirds of parents expect to participate in adolescents’ walking/­
cycling to school decision-making, emphasising the critical role that parents and therefore family factors play in ATS-related decision
making for teenagers (Mandic et al., 2020).
    The school commute period MVPA model fitted included a term comparing those students attending the closest school with those
not attending the closest school. Although the associated parameter (the second factor listed in Table 4) was not statistically signif­
icantly different from zero, the estimated value was not dissimilar from the parameter estimate for living within a cyclable (but not
walkable) distance from school. This highlights uncertainties around the associations of school commute period MVPA with attending
the closest school (or not) due to the relatively small sample sizes available for the analysis. Similarly hampered by small sample sizes
were our inferences by ethnicity. Although Ma      <U+FFFD>ori adolescents (n ¼ 6) were estimated to undertake more MVPA (8.4 min) than NZ
European adolescents (n ¼ 100) during the school commute period, the confidence interval was wide ( 0.1, 16.9).
    Given the urgency of taking action to increase adolescents’ physical activity, an additional 3.4 min per day during the school
commute period for students not attending the closest school would be a highly worthwhile result of school zoning policy. School-
based physical activity interventions involve considerable effort and their results in terms of MVPA have been generally disap­
pointing (Love et al., 2019). When reflecting on their null result in a meta-analysis of the effectiveness of school-based interventions,
Love et al. (2019) considered that collective efforts to increase PA levels in one setting (schools) were unlikely to be successful when
the wider environment did not support behaviour change. The current study has looked at potential benefits of school zoning, one
element of a complex system providing the context for population PA levels (Spence and Lee, 2003). To address some limitations
associated with a number of assumptions underlying our analysis, future research could usefully use quasi-experimental approaches to
study actual changes arising from a newly-implemented school zoning policy.

4.1. Limitations

    A limitation of the current analysis is that the relatively small sample sizes studied of travel and accelerometer data provided
relatively poor power to detect associations. This study also could not assess potential causal mechanisms shown in Fig. 1. For example,
the additional minutes of MVPA during the school commute period estimated for ATS are likely to arise mainly from walking or
cycling. But it is also possible that this relationship between distance to school and MVPA minutes during school commute period is
confounded by other factors. For example, students who live close to the school may also engage in convenient school-based physical
activities. Their closer proximity to the school also facilitates ATS. Although home-to-school distance (categorised as walkable,
cyclable but not walkable and beyond cyclable distance) was controlled for in the models fitted, the models will only partially adjust
for a mechanism as suggested above, by comparing minutes of MVPA accumulated during the school commute time between students
using different modes of travel to school but living within the same specified distance ranges (e.g., 2.25–4 km).
    The data for analysing trip chaining behaviours in Dunedin were relatively sparse, necessitating eleven years of data from the

                                                                   8

M. Keall et al.                                                                                                          Journal of Transport & Health 18 (2020) 100900


national travel survey. Although changes in travel behaviours over this period can potentially complicate inferences made from the
data, nationally there were relatively small changes in mode share in the school commute for those aged 13–17 years: no change in the
proportion using active transport, a decrease in travel as car passengers, with a corresponding increase in public transport use
(Ministry of Transport, 2015b).

5. Conclusions

    This paper sought to quantify the effects of adolescents’ school enrolment at the closest school (or not) on use of private motorised
vehicle and adolescents’ MVPA levels accumulated during the school commute period in Dunedin city, NZ. The analysis shows po­
tential reductions in private motorised vehicles traffic and increases in adolescents’ MVPA during the school commute period asso­
ciated with attending the closest school. While the impact on overall city traffic may appear relatively minor, the reduction in traffic
congestion around schools is likely to be much higher. It also signals the importance of conceptualising the trip to school in the context
of household-wide travel practices.

Authors’ contributions

   MK conceived this sub-study, conducted the analysis and led the drafting of the paper; SM is the principal investigator who
conceptualized the overall study, obtained research funding, led the project implementation. SM, KC, DH and SS drafted sections of the
manuscript. SM, DH, GW, SS, JCS and EGB contributed to the design of the BEATS Study and questionnaires. All authors read and
approved the final version of the manuscript.

Funding

   The BEATS Study was supported by the Health Research Council of New Zealand Emerging Researcher First Grant (14/565),
National Heart Foundation of New Zealand (1602 and 1615), Lottery Health Research Grant (Applic 341129), University of Otago
Research Grant (UORG, 2014), Dunedin City Council and internal grants from the School of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise
Sciences, University of Otago.

Declaration of competing interest

   Mr Gordon Wilson worked as the manager of the Dunedin Secondary Schools’ Partnership and has been a part of the BEATS Study
research team from the study inception. Other authors do not have any competing financial interests.

Acknowledgements

   The BEATS Study is a collaboration between Dunedin Secondary Schools’ Partnership, Dunedin City Council and University of
Otago. We would like to acknowledge work of our research team members, including Tony Moore’s GIS and spatial data analysis, the
members of the BEATS Study Advisory Board, research personnel (research assistants, students and volunteers), all participating
schools and students, and Ms Kelli Cain for analysing the accelerometer data.

References

Beenackers, M.A., Kamphuis, C.B., Giskes, K., Brug, J., Kunst, A.E., Burdorf, A., Van Lenthe, F.J., 2012. Socioeconomic inequalities in occupational, leisure-time, and
    transport related physical activity among European adults: a systematic review. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Activ. 9, 116.
Blizzard, L., Hosmer, D.W., 2006. Parameter estimation and goodness-of-fit in log binomial regression. Biom. J. Biometrische Zeitschrift 48, 5–22.
Buliung, R., Faulkner, G., Beesley, T., Kennedy, J., 2011. School travel planning: mobilizing school and community resources to encourage active school
    transportation. J. Sch. Health 81, 704–712.
Cain, K.L., Sallis, J.F., Conway, T.L., Dyck, D.V., Calhoon, L., 2013. Using accelerometers in youth physical activity studies: a review of methods, 10, 437.
Carver, A., Barr, A., Singh, A., Badland, H., Mavoa, S., Bentley, R., 2019. How are the built environment and household travel characteristics associated with
    children’s active transport in Melbourne, Australia? J. Transp. Health 12, 115–129.
Carver, A., Timperio, A., Crawford, D., 2013. Parental chauffeurs: what drives their transport choice? J. Transport Geogr. 26, 72–77.
Corder, K., Ekelund, U., Steele, R.M., Wareham, N.J., Brage, S., 2008. Assessment of physical activity in youth. J. Appl. Physiol. 105, 977–987.
Daisy, N.S., Liu, L., Millward, H., 2018. Trip chaining propensity and tour mode choice of out-of-home workers: evidence from a mid-sized Canadian City.
    Transportation 1–30.
Denny, S., Lewycka, S., Utter, J., Fleming, T., Peiris-John, R., Sheridan, J., Rossen, F., Wynd, D., Teevale, T., Bullen, P., 2016. The association between socioeconomic
    deprivation and secondary school students’ health: findings from a latent class analysis of a national adolescent health survey. Int. J. Equity Health 15, 109.
Evenson, K.R., Catellier, D.J., Gill, K., Ondrak, K.S., McMurray, R.G., 2008. Calibration of two objective measures of physical activity for children. J. Sports Sci. 26,
    1557–1565.
Faulkner, G.E., Buliung, R.N., Flora, P.K., Fusco, C., 2009. Active school transport, physical activity levels and body weight of children and youth: a systematic review.
    Prev. Med. 48, 3–8.
He, S.Y., Giuliano, G., 2018. School choice: understanding the trade-off between travel distance and school quality. Transportation 45, 1475–1498.
Hensher, D.A., Reyes, A.J., 2000. Trip chaining as a barrier to the propensity to use public transport. Transportation 27, 341–361.
Hopkins, D., Bengoechea, E.G., Mandic, S., 2019. Adolescents and their aspirations for private car-based transport. Transportation 1–27.
Hopkins, D., Mandic, S., 2017. Perceptions of cycling among high school students and their parents. Int. J. Sustain. Transport. 11, 342–356.
Ikeda, E., Stewart, T., Garrett, N., Egli, V., Mandic, S., Hosking, J., Witten, K., Hawley, G., Tautolo, E.S., Rodda, J., Moore, A., Smith, M., 2018. Built environment
    associates of active school travel in New Zealand children and youth: a systematic meta-analysis using individual participant data. J. Transp. Health 9, 117–131.


                                                                                    9

