Transportation (2016) 43:159–175
DOI 10.1007/s11116-014-9569-7




Costs of school transportation: quantifying the fiscal
impacts of encouraging walking and bicycling for school
travel

Noreen C. McDonald • Ruth L. Steiner • W. Mathew Palmer •
Allison N. Bullock • Virginia P. Sisiopiku • Benjamin F. Lytle




Published online: 18 November 2014
Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014


Abstract National governments have provided subsidies for investments in increasing
the safety and attractiveness of walking and biking to school. Evaluations of Safe Routes to
School initiatives have found that they have been effective at changing behavior and
reducing injuries. However, there has been little attention to the impacts of these programs
on pupil transportation costs. This analysis assesses the potential economic benefits of Safe
Routes to School programs in the US context by estimating the annual costs of using
motorized transport for short trips to schools, examining real-world examples of the costs
savings of SRTS programs, and evaluating land use impacts on school transportation costs
using a simulation analysis of school bus routes. We find that there is potential for school
districts and families to reduce transport expenditures through public sector investments in
walking and biking infrastructure near schools. We also find that land use context matters



N. C. McDonald (&)  W. M. Palmer
Department of City and Regional Planning, University of North Carolina, New East Building,
CB 3140, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
e-mail: noreen@unc.edu
W. M. Palmer
e-mail: wmpalmer@email.unc.edu

R. L. Steiner  B. F. Lytle
Department of Urban and Regional Planning, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
e-mail: rsteiner@dcp.ufl.edu
B. F. Lytle
e-mail: ben.lytle@aecom.com

A. N. Bullock
Alta Planning ? Design, Durham, NC, USA
e-mail: bullock.allison@gmail.com

V. P. Sisiopiku
Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
e-mail: vsisiopi@uab.edu


                                                                                          123

160                                                            Transportation (2016) 43:159–175


and the most cost-effective investments would benefit schools where large numbers of
children live within walking distance.

Keywords     School transport  Safe routes to school  Costs  School bus  Hazard busing


Introduction

Numerous studies have documented the positive economic impacts of investments in
walking and bicycling infrastructure due to the health benefits of increased physical
activity, improved safety, and decreased air pollution (Cavill et al. 2008; Jarrett et al.
2012). While these benefits have been studied across the population, there has been par-
ticular interest in the impacts on children and adolescents. In recent decades, levels of
physical activity have decreased and obesity has increased among this group (Ogden et al.
2014). One policy response has been the introduction of Safe Routes to School (SRTS)
programs that aim to increase walking and bicycling to school by making routes to school
safer, providing education, and conducting encouragement programs. Currently such ini-
tiatives are found in Europe, New Zealand, Australia, Canada, and the United States.
Researchers have looked at the impacts of these programs and found they lead to increased
active travel and physical activity, and decreased injuries (DiMaggio and Li 2013; Stewart
et al. 2014; Ragland et al. 2014; McDonald et al. 2014; Larouche et al. 2014).
    Missing from the literature on the benefits of SRTS programs has been consideration of
how these programs impact the public and private costs of getting students to and from
school. This is a particularly important issue in the North American context where the
public sector provides specialized school transport. American schools spent $22.3 billion
on student transportation expenses (or 4.2 % of all education spending) during the
2010–2011 school year (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics 2013). However, the topic is also relevant outside North America where students
often rely on public transit for school transport, a system which operates with public sector
support. And across all countries, parents provide a substantial portion of school transport
often by driving students to school.
    This study uses mixed methods to assess the fiscal impacts of encouraging walking and
bicycling for school travel. The focus is on understanding how improving pedestrian and
bicycle infrastructure near schools could reduce the use of cars and buses for short trips to
school. Reducing motorized transport could decrease public sector costs for busing stu-
dents to school, private sector costs to families that drive their children to school, and
related external costs of congestion and air quality. We assess these impacts through
examination of real-world examples and a simulation analysis of school bus routing. The
discussion assesses the spatial contexts where SRTS programs could generate the largest
economic benefits and how economic benefits to districts and families relate to the costs of
pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure.
    This analysis is timely because recent cuts in education spending have disproportion-
ately fallen on support services, such as transportation, in order to preserve classroom
funding. Pupil transportation departments across the country have faced decreased budgets
and increased fuel costs. This combination has led many districts to cut school bus service,
potentially jeopardizing access to education for students. While this article focuses on the
US context, these questions are transnational. Facing similar challenges, the UK and
Australian governments are considering cutting subsidies for school travel (van Ristell
et al. 2014; Cook 2012; Anonymous 2012). The current model of using motorized transport

123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                           161


to overcome hazardous walking conditions may no longer be sustainable in the US or
globally. This article highlights how SRTS can play a role in developing a new multi-
modal model of pupil transportation that promotes walking and biking for short trips and
preserves school bus or public transit service for longer trips.


School transportation costs background

Getting children to school requires large expenditures by the public sector on school bus
operations and infrastructure. But school transportation costs are not exclusively public.
Nearly half of American students use private vehicles to reach school (McDonald et al.
2011). These families bear financial costs in terms of vehicle operation and time. Beyond
the direct costs borne by public and private actors, school travel also imposes costs on
society through externalities like vehicle emissions and congestion. These costs are jus-
tified by the enormous benefits to individuals and society of ensuring access to education
for all children.
    The remainder of this section provides an overview of public, private, and external
school transportation costs in aggregate and for school trips of 1 mile or less. We highlight
trips of 1 mile or less because walking and bicycling are viable modal substitutes for
motorized transportation at these distances. National travel survey data show that fewer
than 35 % of students living within a mile from school walk or bike in the United States;
the remainder of students use private automobiles (44 %) or ride the school bus (19 %)
[authors’ calculations using the 2009 National Household Travel Survey (Federal Highway
Administration 2011)]. SRTS programs aim to change these travel patterns through edu-
cation, encouragement, enforcement, and engineering strategies that make active modes
safer and more attractive.

Public sector

In 2010–2011, student transportation expenses amounted to $22.3 billion dollars in per-
sonnel and fuel costs U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Sta-
tistics (2013). The share of education expenditures for student transportation varied by state,
from 2.4 % in California to 7.3 % in West Virginia. Transportation costs per enrolled
student also varied widely across states. In Utah, the per-student cost of transportation was
just $197, well below the national average of $452 (U.S. Department of Education, National
Center for Education Statistics 2013). Other states with below average transportation costs
per student included California ($220), Texas ($245), Oklahoma ($243), and Colorado
($250). Conversely, some states had high per pupil transportation costs far exceeding the
national average. The District of Columbia had the highest per pupil cost in the nation at
$1,404 per student per year. New York ($982), New Jersey ($834), West Virginia ($879),
and Connecticut ($803) also have higher than average per pupil transportation expenses.
    However, state-level average per pupil transportation costs are not a strong metric of
cost-effectiveness due to the variation in transportation policies and child density across
states and school districts. Some of the observed cost differentials are caused by differing
state rules around pupil transportation. California and Texas, for example, do not have state
legislation that requires student busing (McDonald and Howlett 2007). New York not only
requires transportation for students (for kindergarten through eighth grade students living
more than 2 miles from school, and for ninth through twelfth grade students living more
than 3 miles from school), but also reimburses a large proportion of those costs. Some

                                                                                    123

162                                                            Transportation (2016) 43:159–175


states, such as California, have lower average costs simply because they are transporting a
smaller proportion of students. Conversely, rural states and school districts may transport
children longer distances because of the dispersed nature of population settlement, which
increases costs. In addition, some pupil transportation costs are mandated by the federal
government and cannot be voluntarily reduced by school districts. Busing is federally
required for all homeless students and students with documented special needs. While
national data on special needs busing is scarce, a 2002 study by the Center for Special
Education Finance estimates that special needs busing costs account for 28 % of total pupil
transportation expenditures nationwide (Chambers et al. 2002).

Hazard busing

Most districts provide school bus service when students live more than a specified mini-
mum distance from school, generally 1–2 miles. However, many districts bus children to
school if the walking conditions are unsafe even when they do not meet the distance
threshold; this is known as ‘‘hazard busing.’’ According to Chriqui et al. (2012), just under
a third of states allow exemptions to the minimum distance requirements when hazardous
walking conditions exist and other states allow informal exemptions. Little is known about
hazard busing rates nationwide, but the provision of busing for short distances creates
policy challenges. In 2009, American families reported that 5.6 % of elementary and
middle school students lived within 1 mile of school and used a school bus (authors’
calculations using the 2009 National Household Travel Survey). Presumably, a large
portion of these students received hazard busing, though that was not asked in the survey.
Florida provides detailed annual estimates of hazard busing. In the 2011–2012 school year,
1 % of all students in Florida received hazard busing; this equated to 4 % of all students
riding the bus (Florida Department of Education 2013). However, there is great variation
across school districts. In Hillsborough County, which includes Tampa, 6 % of all students
are bused due to hazardous walking conditions. In Escambia County, which includes
Pensacola, 12 % of students receive hazard busing (Florida Department of Education
2013).
    Estimating the costs of providing school bus service to students living within a walkable
distance of their school is difficult given uncertainties in prevalence. However, the
available US data suggest that approximately one to five percent of students receive hazard
busing. This equates to 0.5–2.5 million American students who receive hazard busing. Per
student costs for hazard busing are likely less than the US average per-student transpor-
tation cost of $452 because that figure includes students with special needs and those that
live quite far from school. If we assume that hazard busing costs are substantially less
because of the short distances involved (approximately $200 per student) then the annual
cost of hazard busing is between $100 and $500 million across the United States.

Private costs

Over half of American students reach school by private vehicle (McDonald et al. 2011).
Parents drive children for many reasons including convenience, time savings, concerns
about traffic safety and stranger danger, or a lack of other options if the school does not
provide busing (McDonald and Aalborg 2009; Dellinger and Staunton 2002; Zhu and Lee
2009). In high school, many teens drive themselves and, in some cases, classmates to
school. McDonald et al. (2011) found that auto trips to and from school accounted for 30
billion vehicle miles and 6.6 billion vehicle trips in 2009. Of these trips, 40 % were

123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                           163


undertaken specifically to drop a child at school and then return home (McDonald et al.
2011). The American Automobile Association (AAA) estimates the cost of gas, mainte-
nance, and tires at 20 cents per mile (American Automobile Association 2013). Based on
these estimates, auto trips to and from school cost a minimum of $2 billion if we only
consider cases where parents made a special trip or a maximum of $6 billion if we consider
all private vehicle school mileage.
    The estimates above ignore the value of travelers’ time. We know of no research that
has investigated the value of parents’ time while chauffeuring children to school. There is
anecdotal evidence that some parents place positive value on driving children to and from
school because of the opportunity to spend time with their children; for others, it may
impose costs because of decreased time available for paid employment. The US Depart-
ment of Transportation provides general guidance on the value of travel time and suggests
that time spent traveling should be valued at 35–60 % of after-tax hourly wages ($8.40–
$14.40) for local, personal travel (Trottenberg 2011). Using the low end (35 %) of the
Department of Transportation range and assuming travel speeds average 30 mph, we found
that the time costs of parents’ driving children to school are around $3 billion for special
trips to drop children at school and $8 billion for all school-related mileage.

Private vehicle costs of short school trips

In 2009, 44 % of the 10 million elementary and middle school students living within
1 mile of school were driven to school (National Center for Education Statistics 2012;
Federal Highway Administration 2014). We estimate that the costs to the private sector of
these short-distance trips were approximately $720 million or 4.5 % of the estimated
aggregate costs of driving children to school. These costs reflect the vehicle operating
expenses and value of parent travel time for short trips where a parent made a special trip
to bring their child to school. While many parents drop children on their way to work,
approximately 40 % make special trips to bring children to school (McDonald et al. 2011).
Assuming an average one-way trip distance of a half-mile for these students and vehicle
occupancy of 1.5 children, we estimate that driving K-8 students living within 1 mile of
school generates 1.5 billion excess vehicle miles of travel annually. Assuming vehicle
operation costs of 20 cents per mile (American Automobile Association 2013), this equates
to $300 million in private vehicle expenses. If we include the value of time in these
estimates, the costs of parents driving children to school increase substantially. If those 1.5
billion excess vehicle miles represent approximately 50 million excess hours of travel
(assuming a rather fast average travel speed of 30 mph), then the collective value of the
travel time is $420 million when the value of time is 35 % of the average hourly wage rate.

External costs

Travel generates other costs which are not necessarily borne by the public or private
sectors. These externalities include the adverse health impacts of vehicle emissions, the
climate impacts of greenhouse gas emissions, and the time costs imposed on other road
users due to congestion. Schools have been identified as major trip generators (McMillan
2007). During the school year, up to 25 % of morning traffic on local roads and 5–7 % of
vehicle miles traveled are generated by parents driving their children to school (McDonald
et al. 2011; Parisi Associates n.d.). According to the Federal Highway Administration,
estimates of the monetary costs of congestion delays range from $0.01 to $0.09 per vehicle
mile traveled. For local air pollution damage, the cost estimates for an average car range

                                                                                    123

164                                                              Transportation (2016) 43:159–175


from $0.01 to $0.07 per vehicle mile traveled and from $0.01 to $0.21 per vehicle mile
traveled by diesel bus. For greenhouse gas control and damage costs, the estimates for an
average car range from $0.02 to $0.21 per vehicle mile traveled and from $0.84 to $1.03
per vehicle mile traveled by diesel bus (Litman and Doherty 2009; Federal Highway
Administration 1997). Considering vehicle mile traveled (VMT) only related to special
purpose school trips, this would cost approximately $120 million for congestion, $120
million for air pollution, and $240 million for greenhouse gas impacts.

External costs for trips of 1 mile or less

Above we estimated that driving children to school a distance of less than 1 mile generated
1.5 billion excess private vehicle miles of travel annually. Using the low end of the cost
range for these externalities, we find that driving children to school for short trips generates
at least $15 million in congestion costs, $15 million in air pollution costs, and $30 million
in greenhouse gas costs annually. We are unable to estimate costs associated with excess
school bus trips because we lack information about how hazard busing affects school bus
VMT nationally.

Summary

In total, annual expenditures on school transportation operating expenses for motorized
modes are approximately $30 billion for school districts and families (Table 1). We
estimate that the proportion of those expenses related to transporting students short dis-
tances (defined as less than 1 mile) are approximately $0.9 to $1.3 billion or 3–5 % of total
public and private sector costs. Externalities from private vehicle school trips, such as
traffic congestion near schools and the air quality impacts of additional driving, add to this
cost, though those expenses are difficult to estimate.


Impacts of safe routes to school programs on school transportation costs:
methodology

We used mixed methods to assess the economic impacts of SRTS. First, we documented
real-world examples of SRTS improvements leading to cost savings for school districts and
families. To identify these examples, we reviewed the literature and contacted each state’s
designated Safe Routes to School State Coordinator and technical assistance staff from the
Safe Routes to School National Partnership. Of the 51 state coordinators contacted, 21
(42 %) responded. A small number of respondents provided examples of SRTS invest-
ments that had resulted in reduced school bus or private vehicle costs. For each of the
identified examples, we reached out to local contacts and conducted open-ended interviews
through email or phone to gather information about the impacts of SRTS on busing and
driving to school. From this process, we identified four case studies in Highland Park, NJ;
Columbia, MO; Phoenix, AZ; and Austin, TX. The literature also contained examples from
Auburn, WA; Marin County, CA; Eugene, OR; and Wooster, OH. Our examination
focused on the connections between SRTS improvements and public and private sector
costs; we did not focus on the factors that led to successful implementation of the SRTS
program since other publications have addressed this topic (see for example National
Center for SRTS 2012).



123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                                        165


Table 1 Summary of the costs associated with motorized school transportation: all trips and trips less than
1 mile
                                                            Total costs—                Costs—trips B
                                                            all distances ($ million)   1 mile ($ million)

Public sector
    School districts                                        22,300                      100–500
Private sector
    Private vehicle operating costs                         2,000–6,000a                300
    Value of parents’ travel time                           3,000–8,000a                420
Externalities
    Traffic congestion near schools from autos              120–300a                    15
    Traffic congestion near schools from school buses       Not estimated               Not estimated
    Air pollution and greenhouse gases from Autos           360–900a                    45
    Air pollution and greenhouse gases from school buses    Not estimated               Not estimated
a
   The low end considers only trips made solely to chauffeur a child to school; the high end considers all
school-related VMT including trips where parents dropped children on their way to another destination


    Second, we used simulation analysis to estimate how busing children short distances
impacted the overall efficiency and costs of school bus service and to understand how these
impacts varied with local context, particularly child density and average distance between
home and school. For example, a SRTS program at a school where all students lived within
walking distance could come close to eliminating motorized transport costs. Conversely,
SRTS improvements would not decrease busing costs if no students lived within walking
and biking distance of the school. We then assessed the savings in school bus costs that
would result from getting students who lived near school to walk and bike. These costs
savings were then compared to the costs of SRTS improvements.
    We utilized school bus routing software to simulate the potential impacts of SRTS
programs on busing costs. As a case study, we selected four elementary schools from a
large North Carolina public school district for the analysis; magnet schools were excluded.
The schools were selected to ensure variation in the number of students living near school.
School A with 92 % of students living within 1 mile was located in an urban part of the
district (Table 2). School D, where only 22 % of students lived within 1 mile of the school,
was located in a suburban/exurban area, where the development patterns were character-
ized by loop- and lollipop-type residential subdivisions. The remainder of the schools
varied between those two extremes.
    To estimate how a SRTS program could impact busing costs by reducing the need for
hazard busing, we analyzed three scenarios for each school (Table 3). These scenarios
varied in the proportion of students living near the school that were bused. Under scenario
1 (no hazard busing), no students living within 1 mile of the school were assigned to bus
routes. For scenario 2, we assumed that half the students living within 1 mile of school
received hazard busing; students were selected at random. The final scenario assumed that
all students living within 1 mile of school required hazard busing. For each of the three
scenarios, students living outside walking distance, i.e. 1 mile, were included in the ana-
lysis, but their assignment (bus/no bus) never changed and was based on what the students
had elected. For each scenario and school, the Pupil Transportation Group at North Car-
olina State University used Education Logistics (EDULOG) software to calculate school
bus vehicle miles traveled (VMT), the number of buses used, and the number of students


                                                                                              123

166                                                                         Transportation (2016) 43:159–175


Table 2 Characteristics of schools in simulation analysis
                    Students living            # of             Average travel            Development
                    within 1 mile (%)          students         distance to               pattern near school
                                                                school (miles)

School A            92                         385              0.8                       Gridded streets
School B            74                         604              0.8                       Gridded streets
School C            62                         264              1.4                       Gridded streets
School D            22                         460              2.5                       Loop and lollipop




Table 3 School busing simulation scenarios
Student residence          Scenario 1            Scenario 2                              Scenario 3
                           no hazard busing      half hazard busing                      all hazard busing

Within 1 mile of school    None bused            50 % of students bused (selected at     100 % of students
                                                  random)                                  bused
More than 1 mile from      Current ridership     Current ridership status                Current ridership
 school                     status                                                        status


serviced. For input parameters, such as maximum trip length, arrival times, and bus stop
locations, we utilized state or district standards. We did not attempt to estimate how
changes in hazard busing would impact private sector costs.
   The estimates of bus route VMT and number of buses were then used to estimate the
costs to the school district to provide school bus service of each scenario. The two com-
ponents of variable school district transport costs are capital expenditures (the money
required to purchase buses) and operations and maintenance. We assumed the district
utilized a two-tiered school transport structure where one bus can service two schools in
the morning and afternoon due to staggered bell times. In practice, this means that capital
and operating expenses associated with the school bus are divided by two to account for the
fact that one school bus serves two routes. For capital costs, we estimated annual costs per
school bus by amortizing the school bus purchase costs of $86,500 over an anticipated
20 year lifespan at a social discount rate of 3.5 % (Delucchi 2005, pp. 3–4; Moore et al.
2004). Based on these calculations, we estimated that each additional bus route required
$3,043 annually in capital costs (i.e. half of the amortized cost per school bus) (Table 4).
Annual expenses for operating and maintaining the school transportation network include
$0.49 per daily school bus vehicle mile for fuel, $7.42 in insurance costs per student bused,
and $14,216 per school bus route for vehicle maintenance, driver and mechanic pay, and
safety monitoring (Table 4). These costs were derived from an investigation of school
transportation costs in North Carolina and reported values from the literature (Sisiopiku
et al. 2013).


Results

The following sections present the results of our mixed-methods investigations of the
potential for non-infrastructure investments to reduce school transportation costs, partic-
ularly to the public sector. The first section documents real-world examples of school


123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                                167


Table 4 Estimated public sector costs of providing school bus service
                                                 Per school bus routea   Per daily bus   Per student
                                                                         VMT             bused

Annualized school bus capital costs               3,043                  0               0
Operating costs
    Insurance                                         0                  0               7.42
    Fuel                                              0                  0.49            0
    Bus driver                                    6,813                  0               0
    Vehicle maintenance                           7,265                  0               0
    Detection and surveillance (including GPS)      138                  0               0
    Total operating expenses                     14,216                  0.49            7.42
Total capital ? operating                        17,259                  0.49            7.42
a
    Assumes two-tiered bus routes



districts that reduced costs to the school district and families through SRTS programs. The
second section reports on the school bus routing simulation analysis that assessed whether
reductions in hazard busing could reduce school district transportation expenses.


Results: real-world examples of the economic impacts of SRTS investments

Through interviews with SRTS experts and the literature, we identified five examples
where investments in SRTS reduced busing costs and three examples of reduced private
vehicle costs.

Public costs: reduced school busing service

Starting in fall 2008, the Highland Park, New Jersey school district eliminated school bus
service in response to a significant reduction in state funding and saved $100,000 per year
in transportation costs. Cutting school bus service was possible because the town is small
(1.9 miles2) and nearly all residents live within 2 miles of school. In anticipation of the
impact that busing cuts would have on the 110 students affected, the School Board and
community partners implemented SRTS initiatives to improve safety. Schools designated
walk-to-school routes and schools and parents organized Walking School Buses. Crossing
guards were hired to assist with larger intersections along the walking routes. To encourage
active transportation to school in lieu of driving, all four public schools also installed more
bike racks and permitted students to store scooters, skateboards, roller skates, and other
transportation equipment in the school office if they did not fit in lockers. Since 2008,
Highland Park has also installed new sidewalks; raised and repainted crosswalks at key
intersections and transit stops; and implemented traffic calming measures, such as curb
extensions and pedestrian islands, to further improve the safety of walking and bicycling.
    SRTS programs have also been used to reduce transportation costs by increasing the
efficiency of bus routes. In June 2013, a Walking Bus Stop pilot program was launched for
Russell Elementary School (Columbia, Missouri) to encourage children to walk together to
a neighborhood school bus stop. Rather than having the school bus pick up and drop off
children separately at their respective residences, the school bus stops for one


                                                                                         123

168                                                            Transportation (2016) 43:159–175


neighborhood were consolidated into a single stop. Volunteer walk leaders led a walking
group along a <U+0092>-mile route to and from the school bus each day, picking up children at
their residences along the way. The program showed that consolidating bus stops saved the
district fuel, bus wear-and-tear, and 10 min of driver time for each bus trip to or from
school. While this pilot program was implemented at a small scale with one neighborhood
along one school bus route, the program demonstrated the ability for significant pupil
transportation cost savings if scaled up to multiple neighborhoods per route along the more
than 100 school bus routes that serve Columbia Public Schools.
   In Auburn, Washington, investments in signage, sidewalks, paths, and traffic calming
measures around schools improved the safety of local routes to school and reduced the
need for hazard bus service. These interventions, coupled with SRTS-funded sidewalks and
bike lanes, made it possible for 20 % of students in Auburn to walk or bike to school,
saving the city $240,000 every year in hazard busing costs (Safe Routes to School National
Partnership 2010). At one Auburn elementary school, the interventions resulted in 85 % of
children walking or biking to school and allowed bus service to be reduced from six buses
to one (Pullen-Seufert et al. 2009). Melrose Elementary in Wooster, Ohio similarly reduced
hazard busing service in exchange for SRTS-funded sidewalks, crosswalks, and school
zone signage (Pedroso et al. 2011). The reduced need for hazard busing saved the school
district $49,000 per year. These cases demonstrate how Safe Routes to School investments
can help school districts reduce pupil transportation costs and plan for tighter transporta-
tion budgets by creating safe walking and bicycling alternatives to school.
   In 2014, the city of Austin constructed a pedestrian bridge over a creek to connect
apartments serving low-income families with their elementary school located a half-mile
away. The bridge cost $750,000 and was paid for by the City and federal grants. Prior to
bridge construction, students were bused to school because there was no safe walking
route. Because of the street configuration, school bus routes were at least 3 miles each way.
With the bridge in place, the school eliminated several bus routes, saving $130,000 in
annual busing costs. City and school officials also coordinated construction of the bridge
with outreach efforts to teach students about safe walking and biking and provide students
the opportunity to receive a free bicycle and training on bike safety in coordination with
the City and the Police Department.
   The Austin example highlighted two critical factors: coordination between the City and
the school district and recognizing child safety as an important factor in deciding where to
make pedestrian and bicycle improvements. In Austin, the Public Works department has a
Child Safety program. This program receives funding from fees for vehicle registration,
parking violations, and traffic violations that occur in a school zone and is responsible for
pedestrian and bicycle safety education in the schools and for school crossing guards. Staff
from the Child Safety Program work closely with school district pupil transportation staff
to monitor school travel safety and identify opportunities to remove hazards. Because the
Child Safety Program is located in the Public Works department, they are also uniquely
able to address the need for improved child pedestrian safety in City of Austin Public
Works projects.

Private costs: reduced passenger vehicle driving

Existing research shows that SRTS interventions have been successful in reducing motor
vehicle trips to schools and the associated cost of that travel. A study on the Marin County
SRTS program examined pre- and post-intervention walking and biking rates to school
after implementing education and encouragement investments that included classroom

123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                                    169


education, walking and biking days, mapped routes, walking trains, and school newsletters.
From 2000 to 2002, the number of children walking to school increased by 64 %; the
number of students biking increased by 114 %; the number of students carpooling
increased by 91 %; and the number of motor vehicles carrying one student decreased by
39 % (Staunton et al. 2003). Similar results were seen at Roosevelt Middle School in
Eugene, Oregon, where a combination of infrastructure and non-infrastructure SRTS
investments were made in crosswalks, school zone signage, a pedestrian path, and edu-
cation and encouragement programs. The proportion of students walking and biking to
school subsequently increased over a three-year period from 27 % in 2007 to 42 % in
2010. At the same time, the number of cars picking up children from school decreased by
24 % (Pedroso et al. 2011).
   Since starting its Safe Routes to School program, Eagle College Preparatory in Phoenix,
Arizona, has seen considerable increases in children walking and biking to school and
reductions in family car trips. In 2010, just one percent of students walked to school. As of
2013, the proportion of children walking to school has increased to 12 %. At the same
time, the drop-off and pick-up process for students who are driven to and from school has
been streamlined. With more students walking and biking, the time it takes to unload and
load students before and after school has been reduced by half. These improvements
reduced the amount of time monitors are needed to supervise student loading zones, the
number of cars idling and the length of time idling, and resulting emissions.


Results: analysis of school bus network impacts of SRTS programs

The busing simulation analysis performed in this study assessed how the amount of hazard
busing combined with the local land use context influenced the costs of providing school
bus service. At school A, with 92 % of students living within 1 mile, we found only one
school bus was required with no hazard busing. However, providing hazard busing to all
students living within 1 mile would require four additional buses (Table 5). The impact of
hazard busing depended on the geographic context of the school. School D, located in a
more suburban area where only 22 % of students lived within 1 mile, required five buses in
the base case of no hazard busing, but only two additional buses if all children living within
1 mile of the school were bused.
   The simulation suggested that the cost impacts of hazard busing can be significant. At
School A, busing the 29 students who lived more than 1 mile from school would cost $60
per enrolled student per year. Per student costs increased substantially with hazard busing.
Providing hazard busing to half of students living within 1 mile of School A would cost

Table 5 Number of students bused, bus vehicle miles of travel, and number of buses for all schools and
scenarios
Hazard busing     # Students bused             Bus VMT                       # of buses
(HB)
                  0%       50 %      100 %     0%       50 %      100 %      0%      50 %      100 %
                  HB       HB        HB        HB       HB        HB         HB      HB        HB

School A           29      206       384         49      91       100        1       3          5
School B          155      379       603       103      122       181        3       6         10
School C           97      180       263       148      160       150        2       4          4
School D          354      406       459       212      290       294        5       6          7



                                                                                          123

170                                                                Transportation (2016) 43:159–175




Fig. 1 School bus transportation costs by hazard busing scenario: per enrolled student and per bused
student


$160 per enrolled student per year—an increase of $100 over the base case of no hazard
busing (Fig. 1). Busing all students living within 1 mile would cost $260 per enrolled
student per year. The magnitude of the per-student cost increase due to hazard busing
decreased as fewer students lived within 1 mile. At School D, providing all students living
within 1 mile with hazard busing cost 38 % more on a per-student basis than the base case
of no hazard busing. These results suggested that reducing the need for hazard busing
through infrastructure improvements could lead to cost savings. Investments in pedestrian
and bicycle infrastructure would be most effective at reducing costs at schools with high
amounts of hazard busing and large numbers of children that live within walking distance
of school.
   Providing hazard busing consistently led to an increase in aggregate and per enrolled
student school bus expenses. However, some districts and states evaluate the efficiency of
school bus provision by considering costs per bused student. For example, the cost per
enrolled student (and therefore total costs) at School A was minimized when no hazard
busing was provided. However, the cost per bused student at School A was $760 with no
hazard busing but dropped to $260 when all students living near school received hazard
busing (Fig. 1). The latter is clearly more costly overall, but assessing costs per bused
student can obscure this fact. This point is not unimportant. Some states, such as North
Carolina, reimburse districts based on the efficiency of their school transportation and this
may provide an incentive to bus students living near school in order to minimize costs per
bused student (Safe Routes to School National Partnership 2014).

Value of cost savings

Cost savings from eliminating hazard busing represent permanent cost savings to school
districts. As such, it is appropriate to capitalize the savings over time. Over a relatively
modest ten year period, eliminating hazard busing at School A is worth $860 per enrolled
student if half of students are hazard bused (at a social discount rate of 3.5 %) (Table 6).
For a 385 student school, this represents $330,000. Potential cost savings are lowest at the
least-dense school, School D, due to residential location patterns that require substantially
more busing and the smaller number of students living close to the school.
   These cost savings compare favorably with the costs of improving infrastructure to
eliminate the need for hazard busing. Table 7 details the costs of common SRTS
improvements and makes clear that, in many contexts, an economic argument can be made


123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                                   171


Table 6 Value of eliminating hazard busing
School            Enrollment         Annual cost savings         Net present value over 10 years

                                     Per-student                 Per-student               Per-school

School A          385                $100                          $860                    $330,000
School B          604                 $90                          $760                    $459,000
School C          264                $140                        $1,140                    $301,000
School D          460                 $50                          $450                    $206,000

Based on eliminating hazard busing to 50 % of students living within 1 mile



Table 7 Estimated cost of com-
                                   Item                             Cost (median)          Unit
mon SRTS infrastructure
improvements
                                   Bicycle rack                           540              Each
                                   Bicycle lane                       89,470               Mile
                                   High visibility crosswalk           3,070               Each
                                   Striped crosswalk                      340              Each
                                   Rapid flashing beacon              14,160               Each
                                   Median island                      10,460               Each
                                   Multi-use trail—paved            261,000                Mile
                                   School crossing                        520              Each
                                   Concrete sidewalk                      27               Linear foot
Source Bushell et al. (2013,       Crossing Guard                      6,360               Intersection
Appendix D)


for decreasing busing costs by making infrastructure improvements near schools. For
example, if a dangerous road crossing prevents students from walking to school, the
crossing could be improved with the addition of a high-visibility crosswalk, flashing
beacon, and median island. The costs of these improvements are often substantially less
than the present value of the costs of busing students over a ten-year period.


Discussion

School busing was introduced to allow students living far from schools to receive an
education. However, as concerns about traffic safety and stranger danger have increased,
the majority of children living within walking distance are now transported by bus or
private vehicle. Leaving aside potential health benefits from increased walking and biking,
the analysis presented in this paper suggests there are opportunities for cost savings for
state departments of education, local school districts, families, and communities if these
trends reverse. Schools can save money by eliminating hazardous conditions that make it
difficult for many students to walk short distances to school. Families can eliminate the
costs associated with private travel by walking or biking their children to school or col-
laborating with neighbors to ensure the safe movement of their children to school. Com-
munities can save through reduced congestion near schools and the costs associated with
exposure to air pollution.



                                                                                          123

172                                                            Transportation (2016) 43:159–175


    The elimination of hazard busing through infrastructure investment can reduce the pupil
transportation costs by an estimated $100–$500 million per year. If these children then
walk or bicycle to school, these cost savings can be fully realized. If parents drive their
children to school when hazard busing is eliminated, this will reduce costs to schools but
have the unfortunate effect of increasing costs for families. Several school districts have
used SRTS investments to eliminate hazard busing or address cuts in school busing through
improved infrastructure. Austin, Texas provides a compelling example of how cities and
school transportation departments can work toward a common goal of providing safe travel
for children across multiple modes. This analysis also shows that the economic returns of
SRTS investments are highest at schools where many students live within walking distance
and could benefit from SRTS projects.
    The difficulties associated with the argument that SRTS investments can save money by
eliminating hazard busing are multidimensional and complicated by current institutional
practices. In the United States, infrastructure improvements are generally the responsibility
of the municipality or the state department of transportation. When school districts provide
school bus service, the costs are borne locally and may be partially offset through reim-
bursements from the state department of education. So the costs and benefits of reducing
hazard busing accrue to different agencies. Overcoming these barriers requires agreement
between the city, schools, and parents that safe school travel requires busing for students
living beyond a walkable distance and safe streets for students living close to school.
Beyond the shared vision, cities and schools must also work together so that cities are
aware of the need for infrastructure improvements and schools have advance warning
about improvements.
    State departments of education must also consider how pupil transportation assistance to
districts encourages or discourages walking and bicycling. Our analysis highlighted how
some reimbursement formulas that focus on costs per bused student might actually
encourage inefficient busing practices among school districts. In order to reduce per-
student cost calculations, districts may provide busing to students living near schools who
might otherwise walk, thereby encouraging inefficient use of public resources. Simple
fixes, such as including language that eliminates reimbursement for students living within
walking distance, would remove this incentive and encourage school districts to work with
municipal governments to eliminate hazardous walking conditions near schools.
    Finally, the removal of hazard busing due to the elimination of dangerous conditions
can only be considered fully successful if families utilize the infrastructure and children
begin to walk and bike. If the removal of hazard busing simply shifts the costs of getting
students to school onto families, then there is little benefit to society. Thus, schools and
cities working together to identify and mitigate hazardous conditions is not enough;
families must be part of the process as well. Cutting hazard bus routes—even if conditions
no longer warrant them—can feel like cutting a public service to families. Unless the city
and district communicate the proposed changes and provide extra services, such as
crossing guards, to aid in the transition, families may not like the change and may even
oppose implementation.
    Further research related to the potential fiscal benefits of non-motorized infrastructure
improvements is needed. Within the realm of children’s travel, there is need for detailed
analyses that calculate the changes in transportation costs resulting from SRTS invest-
ments. Studies analyzing the impacts of SRTS should begin to include economic factors
and not only safety and travel behavior. Broader evaluations of the co-benefits of walking
and bicycling should also consider the inclusion of fiscal dimensions, particularly related to
public sector costs.

123

Transportation (2016) 43:159–175                                                                           173


Conclusion

SRTS programs have been shown to be effective at increasing walking and bicycling,
physical activity and safety. Most previous evaluations have focused on these metrics and
their attendant health benefits. However, this paper has demonstrated that SRTS programs
could also provide economic benefits by reducing the need to bus or drive students to
overcome hazardous walking conditions. Opportunities for cost savings will vary with the
local context. Investments in SRTS infrastructure will provide the largest financial benefit
in situations where a large proportion of students live near the school and many of these
students receive hazardous busing. While these results derive from the US context, the
lessons apply whenever the public and private sectors pay for motorized transport to
overcome hazardous walking conditions.

Acknowledgments This project was funded by the Active Living Research program of the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation and the Southeastern Transportation Research, Innovation, Development and Education
Center (STRIDE) with funding from US Department of Transportation.



References

American Automobile Association: Your driving costs: how much are you really paying to drive? American
      Automobile Association, Washington, DC (2013)
Anonymous: Vic school transport subsidy cuts attacked. The Australian. (2012) http://www.theaustralian.
      com.au/news/latest-news/vic-school-transport-subsidy-cuts-attacked/story-fn3dxiwe-1226526055643
Bushell, M.A., Poole, B.W., Zegeer, C.V., Rodriguez, D.A.: Costs for pedestrian and bicyclist infrastructure
      improvements: a resource for researchers, engineers, planners and the general public. UNC Highway
      Safety Research Center, Chapel Hill, NC (2013)
Cavill, N., Kahlmeier, S., Rutter, H., Racioppi, F., Oja, P.: Economic analyses of transport infrastructure and
      policies including health effects related to cycling and walking: a systematic review. Transp. Policy 15,
      291–304 (2008). doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2008.11.001
Chambers, J.G., Parrish, T.B., Lam, I.: What are we spending on transportation services for students with
      disabilities, 1999–2000? Center for Special Education Finance, Palo Alto, CA (2002)
Chriqui, J.F., Taber, D.R., Slater, S.J., Turner, L., Lowrey, K.M., Chaloupka, F.J.: The impact of state safe
      routes to school-related laws on active travel to school policies and practices in US elementary schools.
      Health Place 18, 8–15 (2012)
Cook, H.: School bus subsidy cut. The Age. http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/school-bus-subsidy-cut-
      20121030-28hr2.html (2012)
Dellinger, A.M., Staunton, C.E.: Barriers to children walking and biking to school—United States, 1999.
      MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkl. Rep. 51, 701–704 (2002)
Delucchi, M.: Motor-vehicle infrastructure and services provided by the public sector. Institute of Trans-
      portation Studies, Davis, CA (2005)
DiMaggio, C., Li, G.: Effectiveness of a safe routes to school program in preventing school-aged pedestrian
      injury. Pediatrics 131, 290–296 (2013). doi:10.1542/peds.2012-2182
Federal Highway Administration.: 2009 National household travel survey user’s guide. U.S. Department of
      Transportation, Washington, DC (2011)
Federal Highway Administration.: Federal highway cost allocation study, final report. US Department of
      Transportation, Washington, DC (1997)
Federal Highway Administration.: Online analysis tools: table designer. US Department of Transportation.
      http://nhts.ornl.gov/tools.shtml (2014). Accessed 12 Nov 2014
Florida Department of Education.: The quality link: Florida school district transportation profiles. Florida
      Department of Education, Tallahassee, FL (2013)
Jarrett, J., Woodcock, J., Griffiths, U.K., Chalabi, Z., Edwards, P., Roberts, I., Haines, A.: Effect of
      increasing active travel in urban England and Wales on costs to the National Health Service. The
      Lancet 379, 2198–2205 (2012). doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60766-1




                                                                                                  123

