Transport Reviews, 2013
Vol. 33, No. 1, 21 –43, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2012.743490
Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School
Transportation: A Review and Framework for
Future Research
RAKTIM MITRA
School of Urban and Regional Planning, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada
(Received 18 March 2012; revised 19 October 2012; accepted 22 October 2012)
ABSTRACT      Interest in active school transportation has emerged in response to concern over the
reduced levels of physical activity (PA) among children. PA derived from active school travel may
have important implications for the healthy development of children and youth. This article
reviews transportation, urban planning, health and environmental psychology literatures to
explore current understanding of school travel behaviour. The major theoretical approaches used
to study and explain walking/cycling behaviour were examined; and existing evidence of the influ-
ences on school travel outcomes was summarized. Based on this review, the paper outlines a concep-
tual framework for exploring school travel behaviour of children and youth. The model hypothesizes
multiple levels of influence on independent mobility and mode choice for school transportation; inde-
pendent mobility is conceptualized within the household activity-travel paradigm. Future empirical
research based on this framework will inform policy interventions that are focused on children’s
active mobility and PA.
Keywords: physical activity; children; youth; built environment; escort; behavioural model
of school transportation
Introduction
Researchers and practitioners have identified active school transportation
(AST: walking and cycling to or from school) as a potential source of physical
activity (PA) and daily energy expenditure for children and youth. Underlying
this observation is concern over the increase in the prevalence of childhood over-
weight and obesity in North America and other Western countries during the
past decades (Ogden et al., 2006; Shields, 2004; Wang & Lobstein, 2006). Research
on adults indicates that regular participation in endurance-type PA, such as
walking and cycling, can offer longer term health benefits by reducing the risk
of obesity, several types of chronic diseases including cardio-vascular diseases
and type II diabetes, and by improving quality of life (DHHS, 1996; Saris et al.,
2003; Transportation Research Board, 2005). Empirical evidence on children is
Correspondence Address: Raktim Mitra, School of Urban and Regional Planning, Ryerson University 105
Bond Street, Toronto, ON M5B 1Y3, Canada. Email: raktim.mitra@ryerson.ca
# 2013 Taylor & Francis

22   R. Mitra
limited, but those who actively travel to and/or from school, and subsequently
adapt to an active lifestyle, may also enjoy similar health benefits (Faulkner,
Buliung, Flora, & Fusco, 2009; Tudor-Locke, Ainsworth, & Popkin, 2001). In
addition, researchers have hypothesized that increased participation in AST
may associate with a decrease in localized congestion (Black, Collins, & Snell,
2001). Within this context, then, it is concerning that AST rates have declined
across Western countries, at least during the last three decades (Buliung, Mitra,
& Faulkner, 2009; Grize, Bringolf-Isler, Martin, & Braun-Fahrla¨nder, 2010; McDo-
nald, 2007; van der Ploeg, Merom, Corpuz, & Bauman, 2008).
   To reverse this trend, policy-makers, practitioners and community-based organ-
izations have emphasized the need for interventions that enable AST uptake
among children and youth (DHHS, 2009; Green Communities Canada, 2011;
MHPO, 2005; NC-SRTS, 2007; OPPI, 2009). For example, in the USA, the Federally
funded Safe Routes to School (SRTS) programs broadly focus on interventions
such as education on road safety, encouragement about walking and cycling,
enforcement of traffic laws around school, and engineering of the neighbour-
hood/street along the school routes (e.g. sidewalks), to create an enabling
environment for walking/cycling (NC-SRTS, 2007). The 2005 SAFETEA-LU
Federal transportation bill allocated $612 billion to the SRTS programs, which is
distributed to the local agencies through the State Department of Transportations
(NC-SRTS, 2007; Stewart, 2011). However, the SAFETEA-LU legislation requires
70– 90% of this Federal funding to be spent on transportation-related infrastruc-
ture development (Stewart, 2011). In contrast, education and promotion have
remained the focus of the community-based School Travel Planning (STP)
program in Canada, which is funded by the Public Health Agency of Canada
(Buliung, Faulkner, Beesley, & Kennedy, 2011; Green Communities Canada, 2011;
Metrolinx, 2011).
   The effectiveness of these interventions remains understudied; limited existing
research has reported only small improvements in AST rates after interventions
were implemented. For example, in California, USA, SRTS projects that empha-
sized on improved sidewalks, crosswalks, bicycle lanes proved to be less effective
in increasing AST rates (Boarnet, Anderson, Day, & McMillan, 2005). In Canada,
AST rates increased only by 2.1% after STP interventions were implemented at
12 elementary schools (Buliung et al., 2011). However, a survey of parents/care-
givers of these children revealed that road safety education was more effective
in influencing their behaviour, compared with the capital improvement projects.
Weather and convenience (related to the value of time and trip chaining) were
identified as primary reasons for an escorted automobile trip to/from school
(Buliung et al., 2011). These findings are not entirely surprising, because initiatives
such as SRTS and STP were not informed by adequate evidence-based research on
school transportation behaviour. An improved understanding of the social and
environmental influences on school travel mode choice behaviour is critical,
then, in order to facilitate the development of more appropriate policy and pro-
grams/initiatives in future, or improve the current ones for that matter.
   Empirical knowledge on the enablers and barriers to AST continues to develop.
The existing research has largely adopted an ecological approach to study school
travel, and explores the potential influence of generalized travel cost (e.g. dis-
tance) and the environment (perceived or objective) on the choice between
travel modes. Some researchers have explored school travel within the household
activity-travel framework (Black et al., 2001; McDonald, 2008a; McMillan, 2005;

                  Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation  23
Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008). Despite an emerging interest in caregiver – child
travel interactions that may lead to an escorted versus an independent school
trip, the behavioural processes related to independent school travel remains
unclear and an understudied theme in the current literature.
   This paper reviews current conceptual and empirical understanding of school
transportation behaviour, with a view to developing a conceptual framework
for exploring the school travel behaviour of children and youth. The paper has
three objectives: (1) to evaluate the major theoretical approaches used by research-
ers to study and explain walking/cycling behaviour in general, and AST in par-
ticular; (2) to review evidence of the potential influences on school travel
outcomes and (3) to outline a conceptual framework of the relationship between
the environment, household travel constraints and school travel outcomes, in
order to guide future research on school transportation behaviour, particularly
in North America. Empirical research based on this framework will advance
current understandings of school travel mode choice processes, and will help
transportation/urban planners and public health professionals in designing
informed interventions to encourage AST.
Active School Transportation as a Research Problem
Transportation, urban planning and public health professionals have explored
active travel behaviour, particularly that of an adult, within different contexts.
A rather extensive literature in urban planning has examined the relationship
between the built environment and walking/cycling. This literature is primarily
motivated by the desire to better understand how various transport outcomes
may or may not emerge from the implementation of contemporary urban planning
principles such as New Urbanism, Transit-Oriented Development and Smart
Growth. Notably, these principles collectively advocate for walking/cycling and
using transit as means to improve environmental sustainability and urban livability
(Cao, Mokhtarian, & Handy, 2009; Greenwald & Boarnet, 2001; Saelens, Sallis, &
Frank, 2003). Transportation mode choice (e.g. decision to walk) is explored in
relation to regional distribution of land use and transportation infrastructure, the
neighbourhood built environment, and the attitudes and preferences of an individ-
ual or household towards lifestyle and travel (Boarnet & Crane, 2001; Cao et al.,
2009; Cervero & Kockelman, 1997; Handy, Cao, & Mokhtarian, 2006).
   Some researchers have recognized the difference in travel behaviour between
an adult and a child/youth (Copperman & Bhat, 2010; Gilbert & O’Brien, 2005;
McMillan, 2007; Mitra, Buliung, & Roorda, 2010). First, the definition of a
walking-friendly built environment can be different for these two populations.
The type of built environment that potentially encourages an adult to walk for
non-work travel purposes (e.g. street connectivity, land use mix) may not
provide an appropriate or attractive environmental setting for a child to walk
to/from school. Instead, proximity to school and safety, or perhaps even the avail-
ability of places for play and meet others along the way, could be more important
motivations for walking (McMillan, 2007; Mitra et al., 2010; Timperio et al., 2006).
Second, a child’s travel mode is likely to be related to the decision processes that
determine whether the child travels independently, or is accompanied by an adult
caregiver (i.e. is escorted to/from school). For example, the likelihood of an
escorted school trip may depend on the availability of caregivers during the
morning or afternoon periods (Copperman & Bhat, 2010; McDonald, 2008a;

24   R. Mitra
Mitra, Buliung, & Faulkner, 2010), which may trigger the use of an automobile as
the travel mode.
   The number of studies that have explored walking/cycling from a public health
perspective has also increased over the past two decades. Active travel, in this lit-
erature, is viewed as a potential opportunity to accumulate the recommended
daily levels of PA. Much of this research in North America followed the US
Surgeon General’s Report on Physical Activity and Health (DHHS, 1996), which
had highlighted the importance of lifelong practice of moderate PA, such as
walking or cycling, in improving the health and quality of life for Americans.
Several policies since then have also focused on the recommended levels of PA
for both adults and children, and active travel as a means to achieve those
targets (DHHS, 2009; MHPO, 2005). However, some researchers have emphasized
the importance of distinguishing between transportation-related and recreational
PA, because the factors that influence the participation in one or more of these
activities can be very different (Lee & Moudon, 2004; Transportation Research
Board, 2005).
   For children and youth, the potential sources of PA can take four possible forms:
(1) outdoor leisure or recreational type PA including organized sport or play, (2)
organized PA during school hours, (3) PA at home and (4) active transportation
to and from places and activities such as school. Since a child has to travel to/
from school on a daily basis, AST can be a regular source of PA during the
school year. Empirical research also suggests that children who regularly walk
to school are more physically active overall (Cooper, Page, Foster, & Qahwaji,
2003; Faulkner et al., 2009). Similar to adults, these different types of PA are under-
taken within different contexts. Recent research on children’s PA participation has
indicated that the correlates for each type of PA are also potentially different
(Page, Cooper, Griew, & Jago, 2010). Drawing a conceptual distinction between
school transportation from other types of PA is important for future empirical
research, because interventions designed to promote active travel to/from
school may not directly increase participation in other types of PA (Giles-Corti,
Timperio, Bull, & Pikora, 2005; Page et al., 2010).
The Intersection of Theory and Active Travel
The purpose of this paper is to outline a conceptual model for future empirical
work on children’s mobility for school transportation. Existing empirical research
has used several theoretical approaches to explore active travel among adults and
children, with noticeable overlap across disciplines owing to the interdisciplinary
nature of the research problem. These approaches are reviewed in this section. An
effort has been made to classify them by the primary fields of their applications,
which include transportation/urban planning, PA/public health, and environ-
mental psychology.
Transportation and Urban Planning
In the fields of transportation and urban planning, quantitative travel behaviour
research has drawn largely on consumer choice theory and its further develop-
ments by Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985), McFadden (1974) and other researchers.
A transportation model usually treats mode choice as an economic choice process,
where each individual maximizes his/her net benefit or utility in terms of the

                  Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation        25
generalized costs associated with a trip. For example, an individual will walk to a
destination if it is cheaper (a function of the generalized cost of travel), safer and
easier than driving.
   Early transportation engineering models of travel mode choice largely explored
the attributes of a trip itself (e.g. generalized cost) and that of the traveller; charac-
teristics of the origins and destinations (i.e. the trip-ends) remained largely over-
looked (Cervero, 2002; Ewing, Schroeer, & Greene, 2004). Research in urban
planning has extended this theoretical framework to examine the relationship
between the built environment and mode choice; the built-environment character-
istics are hypothesized to contribute to the utility (i.e. explain, at least partly, the
generalized travel cost) of taking a particular mode for travelling between desti-
nations (Boarnet & Crane, 2001; Cervero, 2002; Cervero & Kockelman, 1997).
   Working within a consumer choice theory-based framework, Cervero and
Kockelman (1997) popularized the concept of considering density, diversity or
land use mix and design, (i.e. the 3Ds) to examine the built environment for trans-
portation research. Later research has repeatedly used this approach to study
adult travel behaviour (Cervero, 2002; Krizek, 2003). The Transportation Research
Board (2005) has defined the built environment to include land use patterns, trans-
portation infrastructure and urban design features (i.e. aesthetic, physical and
functional qualities of buildings and streets). Together, these elements are
expected to facilitate active travel and PA. Also, Moudon and Lee (2003) proposed
a behavioural model of environment, which identifies the generic environmental
aspects that may influence participation in outdoor physical activities, particularly
walking/cycling for adults. Using this normative framework, Lee and Moudon
(2006) later suggested that the characteristics at the destination, distance,
density and travel route (i.e. the 3D + R) likely influence the choice of an active
mode for travelling between destinations. Despite a recognition that the environ-
ment-related enablers and barriers to walking/cycling can be different for adults
and children, efforts to conceptualize the relationship between the built environ-
ment and a child’s travel remains limited (McMillan, 2005; Panter, Jones, & van
Sluijs, 2008). Instead, the current AST research has largely drawn its environ-
mental variables based on theoretical or empirical works that explore adult
travel behaviour (Ewing et al., 2004; Lin & Chang, 2010; Panter, Jones, van
Sluijs, & Griffin, 2010a).
   Transportation/urban planners have also taken notice of the relationship
between attitudes/preferences, cognitive processes and travel demand, particu-
larly, the choice of active modes such as walking and cycling (Boarnet &
Crane, 2001; Cao et al., 2009; Ewing & Cervero, 2010; Kitamura, Mokhtarian, &
Laidet, 1997). With regard to school transportation, a child’s travel mode can
often be influenced by a household’s residential location choice, where a house-
hold, perhaps with sufficient income, self-selects themselves into a neighbour-
hood of preference. Also, a child’s travel may be influenced by the perceived
convenience of travel modes (McMillan, 2007; Panter, Jones, van Sluijs, &
Griffin, 2010b). Typical consumer choice theory-based models of travel behaviour
are theoretically weak in explaining such relationships (Walker, 2001). These
models link observed variables to the potential behavioural outcomes, assuming
that the alternative with the maximum utility is chosen; the actual behavioural
process remains largely unexplored. While econometric modeling methods can
be enhanced to allow a closer examination of the behavioural processes (e.g. atti-
tudes can be studied as latent variables) (Walker, 2001), existing quantitative

26   R. Mitra
research on travel behaviour, for most part, has largely explored attitudes/
preferences as control or confounding variables (Black et al., 2001; Cao et al.,
2009; Ewing & Cervero, 2010). To explain the association between environmental
and travel-related attitudes and mode choice outcomes of both adults and chil-
dren, researchers have frequently drawn on the theory of planned behaviour
(TPB) (Bagley & Mokhtarian, 2002; Black et al., 2001; Cao et al., 2009; Handy
et al., 2006).
   The TPB hypothesizes that intentions, together with perceptions of behavioural
control (i.e. difficulty in performing a behaviour), explain variations in the actual
behaviour, when resources and opportunities are available (Ajzen, 1991). The
intention to perform a certain behaviour (e.g. walking to school) can be reasonably
predicted from three psychological constructs—attitudes, subjective norms and
perceived behavioural control. However, the TPB conceptualizes behaviour only
as a product of these psychological constructs, and assumes that all other attri-
butes (including household socio-demographics and the built environment)
operate through the constructs of the theory (Ajzen, 1991; Bamberg, Ajzen, &
Schmidt, 2003). This conceptualization is a potential limitation of this theory in
terms of its application in travel behaviour research. For example, the theory is
weak in examining the direct effects of the built environment on travel, unless it
is assumed that a household’s perception of the environment can be objectively
represented by measured built-environment characteristics.
   Some researchers in the field of transportation/urban planning have adopted
the human activity theory to explore the effect of household preferences and con-
straints on travel outcomes. This approach to travel behaviour research is based on
the theorization of household activity participation pattern in space and time, and
is commonly known as the activity-travel approach (Chapin, 1974; Ha¨gerstrand,
1970; Jones, 1979). The activity-travel framework provides a number of advantages
with respect to understanding household travel, which can also be translated to
school transportation behaviour. First, by acknowledging spatial, temporal and
inter-personal constraints on activity participation, the activity-travel concept pro-
vides a theoretical basis to study the effects of scheduling and trip-chaining on
travel patterns of a child and his/her caregiver(s), and the subsequent mode
choice outcomes. Second, this approach not only recognizes the possibility of a
child’s travel being influenced by caregivers’ travel needs, it also remains open
to accommodate the possibility that caregivers may adjust their travel in response
to the child’s activity participation at school, elsewhere within a neighbourhood, or
beyond (Copperman & Bhat, 2010). Finally, the activity-travel framework
acknowledges the importance of environment-related preferences (i.e. attitudes)
and constraints on travel decision processes (Jones, 1979; McMillan, 2005), and
hence, can be applied to design theoretically grounded research focused on the
relationship between the environment, attitudes and travel outcomes.
   However, the application of the activity-travel framework in understanding
mode choice behaviour remains limited; perhaps because of the unavailability
of data at the appropriate levels of detail, and the potential methodological com-
plexity involved in research design (Buliung & Kanaroglou, 2007; McNally, 2000).
While several studies have contextualized school travel within the household
activity-travel framework (Black et al., 2001; McDonald, 2008a; McMillan, 2005;
Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008), only a few have explored the influence of care-
giver activity-travel constraints on AST (McDonald, 2008a; Mitra & Buliung,
2012b; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008).

                  Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation       27
PA/Public Health
Contrary to transportation and urban planning research, the PA/public health lit-
erature largely conceptualizes the choice between active and non-active modes as
behavioural, and not economic, in nature. Empirical studies in this field have
mostly applied dominant behavioural theories to understand the processes
involved in the undertaking of active travel and PA. Many of them have drawn
on social cognitive theory (SCT) and social ecological models (Glanz, Rimer, & Vis-
wanath, 2008).
   The SCT builds on the works by Miller and Dolland (1941) and Rotter (1954),
who explained human behaviour based on established principles of learning
within a social context. The theory explains human behaviour as a product of
an individual’s psychosocial and physical capabilities, perception of the environ-
ment and cognitive learning through observation (Bandura, 1986, 1999; McAlister,
Perry, & Parcel, 2008). The SCT also emphasizes a reciprocal relationship between
a person and the environment, where the person learns from and adapts to the
environment (McAlister et al., 2008).
   Social ecological models also emphasize the influence of the environment and
policy on behaviour, while recognizing the social and psychological influences
(Lee & Moudon, 2004; Sallis, Owen, & Fisher, 2008; Stokols, 1977, 1992). The eco-
logical models have evolved around the core concept that behaviour has multiple
levels of influence, and that an exploration of the reciprocal interaction between
these levels is the most effective approach to understand behaviour, or a change
in behaviour. For example, the likelihood of a child’s walking to school can be
influenced by intra-personal (e.g. age, sex), inter-personal (e.g. household compo-
sition, attitudes, social-norm, activity-scheduling), organizational (e.g. education
at school), neighbourhood (e.g. sidewalks) and policy (e.g. school bussing
policy) level influences and the interplay between these aspects across different
levels. A change in behaviour is expected to be maximized within a supportive
“behavior settings” (i.e. the physical environment and policy), given the presence
of individual motivations and social support towards AST (Baker, 1968; Bandura,
1986; Sallis et al., 2008).
   The social ecological models are robust, and are adaptable to many aspects/cat-
egories of human behaviour (Sallis et al., 2008). Researchers have explored specific
health outcomes and behaviours, such as diabetes (Fisher et al., 2005), nutrition
environments or eating behaviour (Glanz, Sallis, Saelens, & Frank, 2005) and PA
(Transportation Research Board, 2005), using the social ecological models
approach. The approach can also be useful in exploring children’s school travel
behaviour, allowing researchers to conceptualize multi-level influences such as
social and the built environment of a neighbourhood, caregiver – child travel inter-
actions and household attitudes on school transportation outcome. Not surpris-
ingly, then, several recent studies have explored AST within a social ecological
framework (Emond & Handy, 2012; Panter et al., 2010a; Robertson-Wilson,
Leatherdale, & Wong, 2008).
   Some researchers have also explored PA and active travel using a behavioural
economics approach (Epstein, 1998; Faulkner, Richichi, Buliung, Fusco, & Moola
2010). Unlike the consumer choice model (which assumes rational choice), the be-
havioural economics conceptualizes that time allocation between daily activities
(e.g. sedentary versus physically active episodes) is influenced by the circumstances
of a given situation, for example, the availability of alternatives, the behavioural cost

28    R. Mitra
needed to access an activity, the reward of engaging in a behaviour, and the delay
between an action and receiving the reward (i.e. immediate benefit versus benefits
in the distant future). The application of this theoretical approach in travel behav-
iour research, however, remains limited (Faulkner et al., 2010).
Environmental Psychology
In the field of environmental psychology, Johansson (2006) used Ku´´ller’s model of
human-environment interaction (HEI) (Ku´´ller, 1991) to explore the behavioural
processes that may influence a child’s independent mobility for leisure activity
participation. Ku´´ller argued that activity participation is the result of a four-step
emotional (i.e. neuropsychological) process (Ku´´ller, 1991). When applied to chil-
dren’s travel, the emotional process for choosing a transportation mode, according
to the HEI-model, starts when a child needs to get to an activity (e.g. school) for the
first time. The need for an activity triggers an “activation” phase (similar to a
psychological arousal), that motivates a child/caregiver to travel. The next stage
in the process is the “orientation” phase, when different travel modes such as
walking, cycling, private automobile and transit, are considered carefully for
the trip, either in the company of an adult, or independently. Next, the available
or accessible mobility options go through an “evaluation”, where the prevailing
states of the physical and social environment that may facilitate or discourage
the use of certain travel modes are considered. This environmental evaluation
may be mediated by individual/household characteristics. Finally, and once a
decision has been made about the preferred travel mode, “control” is obtained,
leading to a trip (Johansson 2006). Ku´´ller (1991) also argued that once control
over a particular transport mode is established, the choice may become habitual,
unless the environmental and/or individual circumstances are altered.
Findings from Existing Research
The literature on children’s school travel behaviour is emerging (Sirard & Slater,
2008; Stewart, 2011). In order to explore the existing evidence on school transpor-
tation behaviour, a scoping review was performed (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005;
Brien, Lorenzetti, Lewis, Kennedy, & Ghali 2010). Forty-two empirical studies
were reviewed, which were published in peer reviewed English language
journals.
   Of these 42 studies, 21 have explicitly reported the use of a theoretical approach
in understanding school travel. Five of these studies have adopted an activity-
travel approach to understand the links between parental travel characteristics
and school travel behaviour (Black et al., 2001; Lin & Chang, 2010; McDonald,
2008a; Vovsha & Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008). Only three
studies emphasized a re-conceptualization of the built environment – travel
relationship in order to explore children’s travel, and have explored AST behav-
iour within the context of a conceptual framework developed specifically for chil-
dren’s school travel (McMillan, 2007; McMillan, Day, Boarnet, Alfonzo, &
Anderson, 2006; Mitra et al., 2010).
   The existing research varies widely with respect to the age-groups that were
explored. While most of these studies focus on children (=13 years old, elemen-
tary and middle school students), six of them have specifically explored youths’
(14 – 17 years old, high school students) travel behaviour, and nine others have

                  Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation    29
examined the travel behaviour of all children and youth aged ,18 years. Most of
this reviewed research used logistic regression or the discrete choice models (i.e.
logit models) to explore school travel mode choice behaviour. Two studies used a
qualitative approach to explore enablers and barriers to AST (Faulkner et al., 2010;
Lang, Collins, & Kearns, 2011). In the field of transportation/urban planning,
researchers have largely explored walking/cycling in relation to all potentially
available travel modes for school travel (i.e. transit, school bus, private auto-
mobile). In contrast, the PA/public health research has focused primarily on the
difference between active (e.g. walking and/or cycling) and non-active (e.g.
transit, school bus, private automobile) travel choices; the difference in choice pro-
cesses between individual travel modes within these two broad categories is not
emphasized in this literature.
   Empirical findings from the current literature can be summarized as follows.
First, household attitudes and self-efficacy beliefs are likely associated with
mode choice for school transportation. Multiple studies have reported that a
child was more likely to be driven to/from school when caregivers viewed cars
to be a convenient and socially acceptable mode of transportation (Faulkner
et al., 2010; Lang et al., 2011; McMillan, 2007; McMillan et al., 2006; Panter et al.,
2010b; Trapp et al., 2011). In contrast, a household’s environmental consciousness
was associated with walking (Black et al., 2001). Confidence about a child’s capa-
bility of being physically active, and road safety skills, also increased the prob-
ability of walking (Emond & Handy, 2012; Lang et al., 2011; Martin, Lee, &
Lowry, 2007; Trapp et al., 2011; Wen et al., 2008). Parents who were supportive
to active transportation and/or acknowledged the importance of a child’s social
interaction (i.e. meeting other children) were more likely to allow their child(ren)
to walk or cycle to school (Emond & Handy, 2012; McMillan, 2007; Timperio et al.,
2006).
   Second, a household’s socio-economic characteristics may moderate school
travel outcome. For example, a household’s access to private automobiles likely
enables driven school trips (Black et al., 2001; Ewing et al., 2004; Grize et al.,
2010; Mitra et al., 2010; Sidharthan, Bhat, Pendyala, & Goulias, 2011). Findings
related to some other socio-economic correlates remain mixed. For example,
some studies have observed correlations between a child’s sex (Emond &
Handy, 2012; Evenson, Huston, McMillen, Bors, & Ward, 2003; Larsen et al.,
2009; McDonald, 2008a), ethnicity (Bere, van der Horst, Oenema, Prins, & Brug,
2008; Evenson et al., 2003; Martin et al., 2007; McDonald, 2008b, 2008c; Wilson,
Marshall, Wilson, & Krizek, 2010; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008) and school
travel modes; others have reported on the contrary (Black et al., 2001; McDonald,
2008b; Mitra et al., 2010). In some studies, an association was observed between
low household income (Ewing et al., 2004; McMillan, 2007; Sidharthan et al.,
2011; Wilson et al., 2010) or low neighbourhood income (Larsen et al., 2009;
McDonald, 2008c) and travel mode choice; in some others, these socio-economic
measures were not correlated with travel outcome (McDonald, 2008a; Timperio
et al., 2006).
   Limited empirical evidence indicates that parental work-travel characteristics
are correlated with escorted (e.g. accompanied by an adult caregiver) school
trip (Faulkner et al., 2010; Vovsha & Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan,
2008), and that independent travel (i.e. trips without the supervision of an adult
caregiver) is associated with the likelihood of walking/cycling (Page et al., 2010;
Trapp et al., 2011; Zwerts, Allaert, Jenssens, Wets, & Witlox, 2010). Children/

30   R. Mitra
youths were less likely to walk to school when parents travelled to work in the
morning period (McDonald, 2008a) or were available for escorting (Emond &
Handy, 2012). The age of a child also is constantly reported to have a strong associ-
ation with the likelihood of walking/cycling (Babey, Hastert, Huang, & Brown,
2009; Bere et al., 2008; Johansson, Hesselberg, & Lafflame, 2011; McDonald,
2008a, 2008b; Robertson-Wilson et al., 2008). This “age-effect” may relate to a
child’s physical/cognitive development as an independent traveller. In other
words, the travel behaviours of a child (an elementary school student) and a
youth (a high school student) can be different. A closer examination into the
potential moderating effect of age on the relationship between travel outcome
and its social and environmental correlates can improve our understanding of
school transportation behaviour. More broadly, the decision processes related to
escorted versus independent school trips, and their relationship with mode
choice outcomes, remain understudied in the current school transportation litera-
ture. Household level travel interactions, and how those interactions may influ-
ence mode choice for school transportation, should also be adequately theorized
and examined to guide future policy focused on children’s active travel and PA.
   Third, the neighbourhood environment appears to influence mode choice for
school transportation. Distance between school and the residence, or travel
time, is most consistently reported to have an association with active mode
choice. As distance/travel cost increased, children and youth were less likely to
walk or cycle to/from school (Babey et al., 2009; Emond & Handy, 2012; Ewing
et al., 2004; McDonald, 2008b; Mitra & Buliung, 2012a; Panter et al., 2010a). Dis-
tance between home and a parent’s workplace was also associated with the like-
lihood of a child being escorted, particularly for school-to-home trips in the
afternoon (Vovsha & Petersen, 2005). Active travelling was also more common
in urban areas, compared with non-urban or rural locations (Babey et al., 2009;
Grize et al., 2010; Martin et al., 2007; Robertson-Wilson et al., 2008).
   With regard to built-environment characteristics, most studies have reported a
negative association between concern over personal and traffic/pedestrian safety
and the likelihood of walking/cycling among children (Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008;
Lang et al., 2011; McDonald & Aalborg, 2009; McMillan, 2007; Panter et al., 2010b;
Timperio et al., 2006). Busy traffic in the neighbourhood streets (Giles-Corti et al.,
2011; Lin & Chang, 2010; Trapp et al., 2011; Zwerts et al., 2010) and major street
crossings (Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008; Emond & Handy, 2012; Larsen, Gilliland, &
Hess, 2012; Trapp et al., 2011) were also barriers to AST. Some studies suggest
positive correlations between pedestrian connectivity (e.g. presence of sidewalks;
pedestrian crossings) and walking school trips (Boarnet et al., 2005; Dalton et al.,
2011; de Vries, Hopman-Rock, Bakker, Hirasing, & van Mechelen, 2010; Ewing
et al., 2004; Kerr et al., 2006; Panter et al., 2010a); others have found a negative
association between higher intersection density (Larsen et al., 2012; Mitra et al.,
2010; Schlossberg, Greene, Phillips, Johnson, & Parker, 2006), street connectivity
(Panter et al., 2010a) or street width (Larsen et al., 2012; Lin & Chang, 2010) and
the likelihood of walking, perhaps due to their potential contribution to traffic
safety concerns (Giles-Corti et al., 2011). Findings related to land use design and
mode choice outcome, however, remains inconclusive. For example, some
studies found dense (Dalton et al., 2011; Kerr et al., 2006; Lin & Chang, 2010;
McDonald, 2008a, 2008b; Nelson, Foley, O’Gorman, Moyna, & Woods, 2008) and
mixed-use neighbourhoods (Larsen et al., 2009; McMillan, 2007) to associate
with walking; others have indicated to the contrary (Ewing et al., 2004; Mitra

                   Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation  31
et al., 2010; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008). High density of residential blocks
tends to associate with more walking (Lin & Chang, 2010; Mitra et al., 2010).
The neighbourhood environment (e.g. sidewalks, smaller residential blocks, low
density of street intersections) may also influence independent versus escorted
school travel (Lin & Chang, 2010). Social environment of a neighbourhood is
important. Current research suggests that the odds of AST was also higher in
the neighbourhoods that are perceived as “walkable”, have a sense of community,
or where other children and adults also walked (Dalton et al., 2011; Mitra et al.,
2010; Panter et al., 2010b; Timperio et al., 2006).
   Finally, some researchers have explored the natural environment and policy-
related influences on school travel outcome. For example, Babey et al. (2009)
reported that children attending public schools were more likely to walk to
school. Students attending neighbourhood schools were also more likely to
walk, compared to those attending larger “magnet schools” (Wilson et al., 2010).
Others, however, found no association between school-specific policies (e.g.
walk to school initiative, separate entrance for pedestrians) and AST (Panter
et al., 2010a). Seasonal climate and weekly weather were found to be uncorrelated
with mode choice (Mitra & Faulkner, 2012; Robertson-Wilson et al., 2008); but
weather conditions at the time of travel likely influenced mode choice (Zwerts
et al., 2010). The topography of the neighbourhood (e.g. steep slope) also influ-
enced mode choice (Lin & Chang, 2010; Panter et al., 2008; Timperio et al.,
2006). Further systematic research is warranted to examine the potential influence
of these natural and policy-related enablers and barriers to travel mode choice.
A Behavioural Model of School Transportation
Adult travel behaviour has been widely theorized within the current discourse of
transportation, urban planning and PA literatures. Several conceptual models also
exist for studying particularly the walking/cycling behaviour of adults (Moudon
& Lee, 2003; Saelens et al., 2003; Transportation Research Board, 2005). In compari-
son, systematic conceptualization of a child’s or youth’s school travel behaviour
has received less attention. McMillan (2005) proposed a framework that relates
the neighbourhood built environment with mode choice behaviour for a child’s
school travel. The framework made an important contribution by re-conceptualiz-
ing the effects of the built environment on children’s travel, instead of merely
transferring knowledge from the research on adult travel behaviour to the
context of children’s school transportation. McMillan argued that a household’s
attitudes, norms, socio-demographic characteristics and mobility options (i.e.
access to private automobile) influence school travel behaviour. The built environ-
ment influences mode choice indirectly, by contributing to personal and traffic
safety within a neighbourhood, and by limiting a household’s transportation
options (e.g. increased distance). McMillan conceptualized school travel behav-
iour largely as a product of parental decision processes. The conceptualization
recognizes but does not emphasize a child’s role in school travel decision pro-
cesses. While the framework applies to the majority of younger children for
whom the caregivers likely play the key role in travel decision making, it may
not adequately explain the travel behaviour of youth who are more independent.
   In a different framework, Panter et al. (2008) focused on the active travel behav-
iour of youth, and hypothesized that both parents and youth may participate in
the travel decision processes. The authors took an ecological approach to under-

32    R. Mitra
stand travel behaviour, and based on current empirical evidence, identified four
domains of influence on the choice of active travel modes—individual/household
factors (e.g. attitudes, perceptions, socio-demographics), the built environment
(neighbourhood, destination and travel route), external domains of influence
(e.g. weather, travel cost, government) and main moderators (e.g. age, sex, dis-
tance to destination). The framework presents a comprehensive summary of the
correlates of active travel. However, it remains less clear in explaining the behav-
ioural processes that may link these factors to the choice of active modes.
   For some time, travel behaviour research has moved towards being theoreti-
cally grounded in the activity-travel framework (Buliung & Kanaroglou, 2007;
Kang & Scott, 2011). This approach can also be important for AST research, par-
ticularly in the context of evidence suggesting that children are often accompanied
by caregiver(s) during school travel (Copperman & Bhat, 2010; McDonald, 2008a;
Vovsha & Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008). Copperman and Bhat
(2010) and McDonald (2008a) theorized that parents take decisions about an
escorted versus independent (i.e. when children are not accompanied by adults)
school trip in relation to their work participation needs, and that a child is more
likely to be driven to/from school if escorted by a parent. However, the potential
influences of other factors, such as the built environment, on independent mobi-
lity or escorted travel, were not explicitly conceptualized.
   Informed by an extensive literature review, this paper outlines a conceptual fra-
mework of school transportation behaviour. Current empirical evidence indicates
that school travel outcome may be affected by multiple levels of influence (e.g. the
urban environment, household, characteristics of a child/youth and other exter-
nal factors). The behavioural model of school transportation (BMST) that is out-
lined here adopts a social-ecological framework to conceptualize this multi-level
relationship. However, the intra-household dynamics of school travel behaviour,
particularly those related to independent (versus escorted) school travel, can be
better understood when contextualized within the household activity-travel fra-
mework (Copperman & Bhat, 2007; Vovsha & Petersen, 2005). Some researchers
have hypothesized that a joint-travel outcome, such as an escorted trip, is deter-
mined by caregiver mobility options (e.g. access to private automobiles) and
activity constraints (e.g. employment) (Copperman & Bhat, 2010; McDonald,
2008a; Vovsha & Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008). Others,
however, emphasize multi-level influences on escorting decision (Faulkner
et al., 2010). The framework outlined here adopts this latter approach, and hypoth-
esizes that household members negotiate the possibility of an independent or
escorted school trip based on: (1) perceived importance of an escorted trip,
which is influenced by household attitudes, a child’s physical and cognitive devel-
opment, and an evaluation of the neighbourhood environment, (2) mobility
options, such as access to private automobiles and (3) activity constraints, such
as a commitment to work and travel scheduling.
   The BMST improves on current theoretical understanding of school travel be-
haviour in several ways. First, the framework explicitly conceptualizes escorted
versus independent mobility and mode choice as two components of the school
travel outcome. Second, with regard to the influence of the neighbourhood
environment, the framework adopts McMillan (2005)’s approach in identifying
the conceptual domains of relationship between the neighbourhood and school
travel outcome. McMillan (2005, 2007) discussed the potential influence of proxi-
mity, traffic/pedestrian safety and aesthetics on AST. This research extends

                     Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation                   33
McMillan’s conceptualization, and informed by the findings from current research
that was discussed in the previous section, identifies five domains of causal links
between the neighbourhood environment and school travel outcome.
   Finally, the model draws on ecological theories of human behaviour (Bandura,
1989; Bronfenbrenner, 1989) and hypothesizes that as children become more
mature, they assume greater control over mobility decisions such as mode
choice. In other words, this research argues that the travel behaviours of a
child and a youth are indeed different. Current evidence indicating an associ-
ation between a child’s age and mode choice (Babey et al., 2009; Bere et al.,
2008; Johansson et al., 2011; McDonald, 2008a, 2008b; Robertson-Wilson et al.,
2008) supports this suggestion. The hypothesized relationships among different
attributes within and between the proposed dimensions are discussed below.
Figure 1 describes the key dimensions of the model. However, the figure is not
an exhaustive description of every variable that might be relevant in any specific
dimension.
The Urban Environment
The urban environment may influence travel in several ways. First, urban spatial
structure, which is defined by the regional distribution of residences, employment
Figure 1. A behavioural model of school transportation.
Notes: Independent trip: a child/youth travels alone or with peers (i.e. siblings or friends), and is not
accompanied by adults. Escorted trip: an adult caregiver facilitates the trip. The built and social
environments of a neighbourhood influence independent mobility and active travel through five con-
ceptual domains of relationship (i.e. mediators)—(1) proximity or the generalized travel cost, (2) traffic
and personal safety, (3) connectivity, (4) comfort and attractiveness and (5) opportunity to produce and
maintain social capital. A mediator is an intervening causal factor between an explanatory variable and
travel outcome (McMillan, 2005). A child’s physical and cognitive development moderates the relation-
                 ship between various levels of influences and school travel outcome.

34    R. Mitra
and other urban facilities (Giuliano & Small, 1993; Shen, 2000), influences a house-
hold’s travel pattern across space and over time. Second, the built environment,
which is characterized by the extent and quality of land use mix, transportation
network and urban design features (i.e. aesthetic, physical and functional qualities
of buildings and streetscapes) (Transportation Research Board, 2005), influences
transportation mode choice. Previous research has indicated that the neighbour-
hood built environment at the residence, at destinations (e.g. around the school)
and en route potentially influence travel outcome (Larsen et al., 2012; Lee &
Moudon, 2004; McMillan, 2005; Mitra et al., 2010; Panter et al., 2008). In case
of school transportation, neighbourhood environment may also influence a
child’s/youth’s independent mobility. Finally, friends, neighbours and other
members of the community (i.e. the social environment) may have important
influences on travel choices.
   The BMST conceptualizes five domains of relationship between the neighbour-
hood environment (both built and social) and school travel outcomes. These
domains are the mediators (i.e. the intervening causal factors) between neigh-
bourhood characteristics and school travel outcome (McMillan, 2005). First,
proximity to school reduces the generalized cost of travel, and makes walking/
cycling a feasible option for school transportation (Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald,
2008b). Parents are also more likely to let their children travel alone for short
distances.
   Second, traffic and personal safety concerns are most commonly reported as
major barriers to AST, along with concerns over travel distance (McDonald &
Aalborg, 2009; McMillan, 2007; Panter et al., 2010b). Neighbourhood street
design, such as the presence of sidewalks, enhances the perception of traffic
safety (Boarnet et al., 2005; Ewing et al., 2004; Panter et al., 2010a). Other charac-
teristics such as four-way streets with high volume of traffic and busy intersec-
tions, may produce safety concerns, and thus, may discourage independent
travel and AST (Giles-Corti et al., 2011; Larsen et al., 2012; Lin & Chang, 2010;
Mitra et al., 2010; Schlossberg et al., 2006). The quality of land use mix/design
is also important. Smaller residential blocks and the presence of street-level
retail in the neighbourhood places eyes on street, and may increase pedestrian
safety (McMillan, 2007; Mitra et al., 2010). Larger retail centers or employment dis-
tricts, on the contrary, may discourage AST, particularly when a child is not
accompanied by an adult, due to both traffic and personal safety concerns. In
addition, the social environment of a neighbourhood may produce important
safety concerns leading to more escorted trips and less walking/cycling for
school transportation. Previous research has identified that children walked less
in neighbourhoods where there were concerns around stranger danger (Panter
et al., 2010b; Timperio et al., 2006) and a child being bullied (Zwerts et al., 2010).
   Third, improved street connectivity encourages active travel among adults
(Ewing & Cervero, 2010). However, studies on children have largely reported a
negative association between street connectivity and children’s AST (Larsen
et al., 2012; Panter et al., 2010a; Timperio et al., 2006). In a recent research, Giles-
Corti et al. (2011) found that children were more likely to walk to school in neigh-
bourhoods characterized by high street connectivity and low traffic volume, and
were less likely to walk in neighbourhoods with high street connectivity and
high volume of traffic. An interconnected street network may produce high
volume of motorized traffic, and may discourage independent mobility and
AST due to traffic safety concerns. Improved pedestrian/bicycling connectivity

                  Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation    35
(i.e. sidewalks, bike paths) between residence and school locations, on the other
hand, would enable AST.
   Fourth, pedestrian comfort and attractiveness of the travel route may encourage
active travel (escorted or otherwise) over automobile use (Larsen et al., 2012;
McMillan, 2007). The presence of open space/parks, tree-lined streets, smaller
neighbourhood blocks and pedestrian-oriented buildings/houses, for example,
may enhance the enjoyment of walking/cycling, or make it comfortable to navi-
gate the built environment between the home and school locations.
   Finally, the opportunity to produce and maintain social capital is a potentially
important yet poorly understood mediator for walking amongst adults and chil-
dren. The social environment, particularly a walkable environment with a strong
sense of community and social cohesion, may provide an opportunity to meet and
greet others and facilitate the maintenance and production of social capital, and
encourage independent mobility and active travel to/from school (Fyhri,
Hijorthol, Mackett, Forel, & Kytta¨, 2011; Mitra et al., 2010; Waygood & Kitamura,
2009; Zwerts et al., 2010).
The Household
School travel decisions involve two components: the choice between independent
and escorted school trips, and between available travel modes. The caregiver(s)
and child(ren) evaluate available or accessible mobility options such as walking,
cycling, taking transit, and driving, either in the company of an adult or indepen-
dently.
   The perceived importance of an escorted trip and AST can be different across
households. The major household-level influences on school travel outcome
relate to socio-demographic and economic characteristics, household travel
behaviour and attitudes. First, social norms, ethnic/cultural values or peer
support may influence school travel behaviour (McAlister et al., 2008; Mitra
et al., 2010; Valentine, 1997). Household mobility options (e.g. access to private
automobile), which may relate to socio-economic status, also facilitate or impose
constraints on the use of certain travel modes (McMillan, 2005; Panter et al.,
2008; Sidharthan et al., 2011).
   Second, a household’s activity participation across space and over time may
enable or restrict a child’s independent travel and/or mode choice for school
transportation, given that school travel is fixed in time (i.e. fixed start and end
times for a school). For example, if the primary caregiver of a child has to travel
to work in the morning, this caregiver may escort the child for convenience (Faul-
kner et al., 2010; McDonald, 2008a). In a household with multiple children, this
process may lead to an escorted travel with multiple stops, or the caregiver
may not escort all children in the household, and rather let them accompany
each other to/from school (Mitra & Buliung, 2012b). However, if the primary care-
giver is unavailable at the time of school travel (i.e. remains engaged in other fixed
activities such as work), the child is more likely to travel independently (Mitra &
Buliung, 2012b). A household’s activity-pattern will likely be influenced by its
socio-demographic characteristics and mobility options. A child’s travel needs
may also influence adult travel pattern. The primary caregiver may adjust
travel schedule to facilitate an escorted school trip, if and when an escorted
school trip is perceived to be highly important. The travel mode of an escorted
school trip will likely depend on the caregiver’s travel mode to work and other

36   R. Mitra
activities (Lin & Chang, 2010; Vovsha & Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan,
2008). In contrast, an independent school trip will eventually lead to a walking/
cycling, transit or school bus trip, alone or with siblings/friends (Mitra &
Buliung, 2012b; Zwerts et al., 2010).
   Finally, confidence about a child’s physical and cognitive capabilities for inde-
pendent travel, or an awareness of the benefits of PA, influences school travel
outcome (Faulkner et al., 2010; Lang et al., 2011; Martin et al., 2007; Wen et al.,
2008). A household’s residential location decision within an urban area is also
likely influenced by their attitudes and preferences towards residential environ-
ment (e.g. urban versus suburban, automobile-oriented versus walking friendly)
(Boarnet & Crane, 2001; Cao et al., 2009; Kitamura et al., 1997). This pre-travel
decision (also known as “self-selection” in urban planning literature) will then
be reflected in the travel behaviour of a household (Cao et al., 2009; Kitamura
et al., 1997; McMillan, 2007; Panter et al., 2010b). However, in the longer term,
the household may adapt to their residential environment and the norms of the
community through repeated exposure and learning.
The Child
A child’s/youth’s self-efficacy belief and attitudes may influence their school
travel outcome. Some youths are more confident about their own capabilities of
travelling independently to/from school than others (Robertson-Wilson et al.,
2008). A child may also develop their own attitudes towards school travel and
PA, as they learn from their parents, friends and neighbours.
   Ecological theories of human behaviour emphasize that a child develops and
matures through an active interplay with the environment (or the psychological
construction of it) (Bandura, 1989; Bronfenbrenner, 1989). In the context of
school travel, children may develop physical and cognitive capabilities of navigat-
ing the neighbourhood environment and handling potential dangers in urban
streets through repeated exposure to the built and social environments. These
developments influence school travel behaviour; research has demonstrated
that children who are considered more “mature” are more likely to be allowed
to walk or cycle on their own (Johansson, 2006; Prezza et al., 2001; Wen et al.,
2008). These physical and cognitive developments would likely correlate with a
child’s age. Caregiver attitudes or evaluations towards independent school
travel, and perhaps, taking an active mode to/from school, also change with a
child’s perceived maturity (Johansson, 2006; Marzoughi, 2011; Timperio, Craw-
ford, Telford, & Salmon, 2004). In addition, a youth’s personal attitudes may
have a significant influence on school travel outcome. As a result, children
become more independent (i.e. tied less to the travel constraints of adults) as
they grow up, and have more control over the choice of transportation options
as youths.
External Influences
Finally, school travel outcome can be influenced by factors that are external to a
household and the physical/social environment of the neighbourhood and the
region (Panter et al., 2008). These external influences can be (1) natural and (2)
policy related. First, the natural environment within which school travel takes
place (e.g. steep slope) can influence mode choice (Timperio et al., 2006).

                  Independent Mobility and Mode Choice for School Transportation      37
Extreme weather conditions on the day of travel may restrict the choice of active
modes (Zwerts et al., 2010). However, the usual school travel mode may not
change due to seasonal climate (e.g. general climatic conditions during fall
versus winter) (Mitra & Faulkner, 2012; Robertson-Wilson et al., 2008).
   Second, national, regional, local and organizational policy contexts may influ-
ence mobility decisions around school transportation. Some regions/municipali-
ties have policies that enable active- and transit-oriented travel practices. School
boards have policies regarding the location of schools, the delineation of catch-
ment areas and the provision of transportation to students (e.g. larger “magnet
schools” versus smaller neighbourhoods schools, school bus distance thresholds,
strategic partnering with local transit authorities for transit pass provision). In
addition, school policy around student transportation differs across age groups
(e.g. for school bus service, different cut-off distance between elementary, second-
ary and high school levels; transit pass provision for youth) (Mitra & Buliung,
2012b), which may lead to different travel choice processes between children
and youth. Schools may also encourage or discourage the use of certain school
travel modes (e.g. walking school bus, no cycle rack on the school premise)
(Babey et al., 2009; Trapp et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2010).
Conclusions
In the context of an emerging literature that examines children’s school travel, the
purpose of this study was to review the prevalent theories of travel behaviour,
explore current literature on school transportation, and use findings from these
reviews to inform the development of a conceptual framework for future empiri-
cal research on this topic, particularly in the North American context. With this
in view, the key theories that may explain walking/cycling behaviour were
reviewed. A total of 42 empirical studies, which exclusively explore children’s
school travel, were also examined. Based on this theoretical and empirical
review, this paper outlines a BMST.
   Theorization of school travel behaviour is important in the context of an increas-
ing policy interest towards the promotion of walking/cycling among children and
youth. An improved understanding of school travel behaviour is critical for
the development of appropriate planning and public health interventions. To
inform the planning of effective interventions, this article outlined three major
research issues at the outset. First, this paper identified that there is a need to the-
orize the causal relationship between built environment and the choice of an
active mode for children’s school travel, instead of translating the findings from
adult travel literature to understand AST. Second, the caregiver – child travel inter-
action was recognized as a potentially important influence on school travel
outcome. Third, the difference between school transportation and other types of
PA was emphasized. The conceptual framework (BMST) addresses these three
issues. It emphasizes a multi-level relationship between the urban environment,
household, intra-personal characteristics of a child/youth, natural and policy con-
texts, and school travel outcome. In addition, the framework contextualizes inde-
pendent travel within the broader household activity-travel paradigm, and argues
that household members negotiate the possibility of an independent or escorted
school trip based on perceived importance of an escorted trip, mobility options
and activity constraints. Five environmental domains of influence on school
travel outcome are also identified.

