Children’s Geographies, 2014
Vol. 12, No. 2, 249–256, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2014.890370
VIEWPOINT
What constitutes a ‘trip’? Examining child journey attributes using GPS and
self-report
Melody Olivera,b*, Suzanne Mavoac,d, Hannah M. Badlandb,d, Penelope A. Carrollc,
Lanuola Asiasigac, N. Tavaec, Robin A. Kearnse and Karen Wittenc
a
  National Institute for Public Health and Mental Health Research, Auckland University of Technology,
Auckland, New Zealand; bCentre for Physical Activity and Nutrition, Auckland University of Technology,
Auckland, New Zealand; cCentre for Social Health Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Massey University,
Auckland, New Zealand; dThe McCaughey Centre: VicHealth Centre for the Promotion of Mental Health
and Community Wellbeing, School of Population Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia; eSchool of Environment, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
       Active travel is associated with improved health and development outcomes in children.
       Accurate detection of children’s travel behaviors and routes, however, is problematic. Travel
       diaries are often used to collect information on children’s travel behaviors, yet no evidence
       for the accuracy of this methodology exists. This study investigated the validity of
       children’s self-reported trips (origin, destination) compared with an objective criterion
       (global positioning systems units; GPS). Children (n = 10, 9–11 y) wore the GPS units for
       seven consecutive days between March and June 2011 and completed travel diaries daily
       with researcher assistance. Af<U+FB01>nity group interviews were conducted in December 2011
       with 30 children from two schools to garner perspectives on trip de<U+FB01>nition, neighborhood
       perceptions, and to illuminate GPS and travel diary <U+FB01>ndings. GPS journeys were manually
       compared with travel diary journeys for destination sequencing, start times, and travel
       mode. Accuracy in trip sequencing was compared by day type, and journey type using
       percentage differences and the chi-square (<U+03C7> 2) statistic. Of the 380 trips captured, 54.5% of
       journey sequences were fully or partially matched, 22.4% were GPS only trips and 23.2%
       travel diary only. Greater accuracy (full/partial match) was observed for weekdays than for
       weekend days and for the journey to or from school than for other journeys. Travel mode
       agreement existed for 99% of matched trips. Although children’s travel diaries may confer
       contextual journey information, they may not provide completely accurate information on
       journey sequencing. Thematic analysis of af<U+FB01>nity group data revealed that reasons for this
       are multifaceted, including differing concepts of what constitutes a ‘trip’. A combined
       approach of GPS and travel diary is recommended to gather a comprehensive understanding
       of children’s journey characteristics.
       Keywords: physical activity; independent mobility; measurement; validity
Introduction
Physical activity is fundamental to health and well-being in children (Strong et al. 2005), and may
be accumulated via non-curricular and unstructured activities such as independent mobility and
active transportation to school. Such non-curricular approaches are seen as sustainable, effective
means by which to encourage physical activity participation in childhood and beyond (Badland
*Corresponding author. Email: melody.oliver@aut.ac.nz
© 2014 Taylor & Francis

250      M. Oliver et al.
and Oliver 2011; Faulkner et al. 2009; Jago and Baranowski 2004; White House Task Force on
Child Obesity 2010). Active travel to school is associated with physical activity accumulation,
lower body fatness, and improved <U+FB01>tness (Lubans et al. 2011; Mendoza et al. 2011). Independent
mobility contributes to increased physical activity via active transportation as well as through
neighbourhood play and exploration, and has been linked with improved spatial and cognitive
development and community social capital (Badland and Oliver 2011). Despite these bene<U+FB01>ts,
evidence suggests that child independent mobility and active travel to school have declined in
recent decades (Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; McDonald et al. 2011; Pooley, Turnbull,
and Adams 2005; van der Ploeg et al. 2008), demonstrating a pressing need for ef<U+FB01>cacious inter-
ventions. These are dependent, however, on the ability to accurately quantify mobility behaviours
in children and to identify factors related to these behaviours. Due to their relatively low
implementation cost and ease of interpretation, travel diaries have been predominantly used to
capture proxy (parental) (Prezza et al. 2001) or child (Mackett et al. 2007a) reports of independent
mobility and active transportation. Given that independent mobility encompasses children ‘free-
ranging’ without supervision, proxy reports are unlikely to accurately capture characteristics of
independently mobile journeys. Limitations of child reports are that they are reliant on participant
recall and comprehension, may be in<U+FB02>uenced by social desirability bias, and require researcher
data cleaning (e.g. imputation of missing dates) and manual entry of data into statistical software
(e.g. Microsoft Excel, SPSS, STATA) (Klesges et al. 2004; Sallis 1991). Little is known of the
validity of travel diaries to accurately assess children’s travel behaviours. Although global posi-
tioning systems (GPS) has been used to assess the accuracy of travel surveys in adults (Stopher,
FitzGerald, and Xu 2007), to date no comparison with an objective measure has been made for
child data. We provide the <U+FB01>rst examination of the accuracy of children’s reports of their travel
to destinations when compared with GPS-derived travel information.
Research methods
Data are drawn from a subset of the Kids in the City study for which full methodology is provided
elsewhere (Oliver et al. 2011). Brie<U+FB02>y, data were collected with children aged 9–11 years in six
schools in Auckland, New Zealand, between March and June 2011. Children were provided with
a wristwatch (to record times) and a GPS unit attached to an elastic belt, turned on and set to log
data every 10 seconds (QStarz BT-Q1000 or BT-Q1000XT; Qstarz International Inc., Taiwan).
Participants were requested to wear the belt for waking hours over the next seven days except
when bathing or swimming. Participants were provided with a travel diary for that afternoon
and the following morning (Figure 1) and given an in-depth explanation of how to record
journey information in the travel diary. Travel was considered movement from one type of
location to another (e.g. home to school and family member’s house to playground). For the
next six weekdays, children were visited at the school, where travel diaries were checked with
the children including checking the child’s recall of the previous day and sequence of locations
travelled to. At this time, GPS data were downloaded, and GPS units were recharged. On
Friday afternoons, children were provided with a GPS charger to charge the units on weekend
evenings, a weekend diary, and written instructions on completing the weekend diary and char-
ging the units. As well, researchers provided interactive demonstrations with children to ensure
comprehension of instructions. At the completion of data collection for each school, travel
diary data were manually entered into a spreadsheet, including date, trip number, trip time, desti-
nation, mode, and accompaniment. A broad destination classi<U+FB01>cation system was utilized for
travel diary and GPS data, whereby groups of destination types were clustered together; for
example, convenience store, shopping centre, and retail parcel lots were all coded as ‘shops’.
GPS data were cleaned using a custom R script, and imported into ArcGIS 9.3 (ESRI Inc.,

                                                                    Children’s Geographies         251
Figure 1. Example of a completed travel diary (a) and corresponding GPS track (b) for one weekday, with
participant details and identi<U+FB01>able location information omitted.
Redlands, CA) for conversion into point shape<U+FB01>les (Mavoa and Oliver 2011; Mavoa et al. 2011).
Land use data were provided by the local council. Destinations in this database were manually
categorized using the same classi<U+FB01>cation system that was used for the travel diaries, enabling
the determination of alignment in sequencing of destinations visited.

252       M. Oliver et al.
     In order to capture potential variability in destinations visited, while recognizing the substan-
tial time required for this examination, data for 10 children from two schools were randomly
selected for this study. Cleaned GPS <U+FB01>les were opened in ArcGIS alongside land use data and
manually checked against the travel diary for sequence of destinations visited (e.g. home–
shops, shops–school, and school–home), journey start times, and travel mode (for GPS data,
speeds > 50 km/h indicated motorized travel). Matches in sequence of locations visited
between travel diary and GPS data were coded as a full match, partial match (matching origin
or destination only), or no match. Accuracy in trip sequencing was compared by day type and
trip type using percentage differences and the chi-square (<U+03C7> 2) statistic. Destination sequencing
was utilized as the measure of accuracy, as we anticipated inaccuracies in children’s reporting
of trip times and duration based on previous work in this area (Badland et al. 2011). Inconsisten-
cies in journey characteristics were also recorded and descriptive statistics were calculated.
     To garner information on how children de<U+FB01>ned a ‘trip’ and illuminate GPS and travel diary
<U+FB01>ndings, af<U+FB01>nity group interviews were conducted with a subsample of 30 Kids in the City par-
ticipants from two of the schools on 1 December and 12 December 2011. Af<U+FB01>nity groups com-
prise approximately four to eight people who know each other and/or have similar interests, in
order to bring about a sense of ease and encourage open discussion about perceptions, feelings,
and behaviours. This method facilitates ‘the identi<U+FB01>cation of shared and contradicting stories,
ideas and understandings through clari<U+FB01>cations, negotiations and con<U+FB01>rmations’ (Keddie 2004,
35). Children who knew each other worked together with a researcher in eight groups (four of
girls and four of boys). Each group was shown an empty (i.e. uncompleted) copy of the travel
diary form which had been utilized in the Kids in the City data collection (which some of the chil-
dren had previous experience in completing seven or eight months earlier, depending on the
school). Children were then asked what they thought a trip was and asked to give examples of
trips they had made in the preceding 24 hours. Data were recorded on an Olympus digital
voice recorder (DS50). Audio <U+FB01>les were transcribed and imported to NVivo 9 for analysis by the-
matic induction. A detailed coding structure was applied based on emergent themes identi<U+FB01>ed in
the transcripts.
Results
Data for 4 boys and 6 girls aged 9–11 years were included in analyses comparing GPS and travel
diary data. From these data, 292 GPS journeys and 295 travel diary journeys were derived (total
380 journeys). Of these, 57.1% of journey sequences were fully or partially matched; 22.4%
were GPS only trips and 23.2% travel diary only (Table 1). Figure 1 shows an example of the mis-
matches found in journey sequencing between GPS and travel diary data for one participant.
Journey types were predominantly trips to or from school, with a wide range of other trip purposes.
Table 1.   Results from manual matching of travel diary and GPS data.
                       Total            Day type                            Journey type
                                Weekday      Weekend day Trip to school Trip from school       Other
Match                  n (%)      n (%)          n (%)          n (%)            n (%)         n (%)
GPS only              75 (19.7) 50 (17.4)      25 (27.2)        1 (2.7)          0 (0)        74 (24.7)
Full                147 (38.7) 135 (46.9)      12 (13.0)       27 (73.0)        32 (72.7)     88 (29.4)
Partial               70 (18.4) 53 (18.4)      17 (18.5)        3 (8.1)          6 (13.6)     61 (20.4)
Travel diary only 88 (23.2) 50 (17.4)          38 (41.3)        6 (16.2)         6 (13.6)     76 (25.4)

                                                                    Children’s Geographies       253
Consequently, a broad ‘other’ category was created to encompass all non-school-related trips.
Greater accuracy (full or partial match) was observed for weekdays than for weekend days (<U+03C7> 2
< 0.001), and for the journey to or from school than for other journeys (<U+03C7> 2 < 0.001). For trips
where time data were available, on average trip start times differed from the GPS times by
44:55 (range 0:00:08–4:44:41). Travel mode was matched in almost all instances (99% of all trips).
     Af<U+FB01>nity group data revealed some differences in what the children considered a ‘trip’ in terms
of <U+FB01>lling in a travel diary, although all except 2 of the 30 felt a trip was where they actually left
their house and garden and went somewhere else: ‘going somewhere besides your house’; ‘every
time you go outside the house and outside the neighbourhood’; ‘going places’; ‘like going swim-
ming or something’; ‘the shops, the mall’; and ‘like a long distance’. Perceptions of how far that
distance needed to be varied from ‘at least a kilometre’ to ‘more than ten metres’. One respondent,
however, felt that going down the path from his house to the rubbish bin constituted a trip; and
another that moving about the house – for instance from the kitchen to the sitting room – ‘could be
a trip, a tiny trip’.
     When children went to more than one destination after leaving home or school, there was
some variation in perception as to whether this constituted one, or more than one trip. For
instance, the boy who ‘walked from home to the shops, shops to school’ saw this as one continu-
ous trip; so did the girl who de<U+FB01>ned a trip as ‘when you go to some place and come back’. Con-
versely, ‘after school I went to my sister’s place and then I went home’ was seen as an example of
two trips by another respondent.
     ‘Trip’ also had a connotation of a longer journey, or going somewhere different or special, for
some children: ‘going on holiday, to the theme parks and that, like a trip’; ‘travelling for Christ-
mas’; ‘go in an aeroplane’; and ‘a camp trip, like when we went, we went [to] Camp Adair’.
Discussion
This is the <U+FB01>rst study to examine the accuracy of children’s self-report of their travel behaviours
compared to an objective criterion. We found considerable inconsistencies between the GPS and
travel diary information, predominantly due to missing travel diary trips that were captured by
GPS. This mostly occurred during trip chaining, where one or more stops between the primary
origin and destination were missed. This may be due to children’s interpretation of what a
‘trip’ comprises, perhaps relating this to utilitarian activities and the primary trip purpose. For
example, while convergence was found for a participant’s return trip from home to church, the
GPS data showed an additional trip to the shops before returning home. This is an example of
children’s different perceptions, as noted above, of what constitutes a single trip or multiple
trips. Many such trips would be considered partial matches, with either the origin or destination
matched. Even if all partially and fully matched trips are combined, this still only amounts to 57%
of trips being matched by origin, destination, or both.
     Concepts of ‘place’ may also in<U+FB02>uence children’s report of their travel behaviours; while con-
cordance was found for a child’s trip to their relative’s house, the GPS data revealed a stop at
another house on the way, and time spent in locations surrounding the house while there (i.e.
local streets and the empty lot next door). Likewise, GPS data captured children spending time
outside residential sites, in culs-de-sac near their house, and in shared driveways; yet these activi-
ties were not captured in the travel diaries, presumably because the children did not consider they
had ‘gone somewhere else’ or were far enough away from home for their mobility to be con-
sidered a ‘trip’. Consequently, use of the travel diary information alone is likely to miss poten-
tially important contributors to overall activity levels, such as hanging out, neighbourhood
play, and short excursions from primary destinations. When examining the effect of environments

254       M. Oliver et al.
on activity behaviour, omitting this information will hide potentially important in<U+FB02>uences on
activity, socialization, and health outcomes (Wheeler et al. 2010).
     There were also some occasions when trips noted in travel diaries were not re<U+FB02>ected in the
GPS data. This is likely a result of trips occurring within the land parcel lot (e.g. within the
home boundary) or GPS non-wear, although non-wear was rarely reported in the diary. For
the most part, the continuity of GPS data points across time suggests that trips were not
missed due to battery failure or participants turning the units off. It is impossible to unequivocally
know the cause of either the missing travel diary or GPS trips. Under-reporting in travel diaries is
likely; however, it is also possible that the travel diary is accurate and the GPS tracks are false, for
example, due to the unit being left in a car, or a non-participant wearing the unit.
     The greatest accuracy in travel diary information was found for the journey to school. Pre-
vious testing of the Safe Routes to School Travel Survey also showed high convergent validity
(when compared with parent reports) for the travel mode for the trip to school (Mendoza et al.
2010). These <U+FB01>ndings are unsurprising, considering the regularity of these trips, the consistency
in scheduling, and time constraints restricting opportunities for trip chaining in morning travel.
Beyond school commutes, the current study <U+FB01>ndings indicate that the use of children’s self-
reported travel behaviours alone is likely to result in considerable under-reporting. Nonetheless,
travel diaries remain an important methodology for understanding children’s travel behaviours.
While advances in technology have enabled the automated calculation of journey purpose
using GPS and GIS in adults (Wolf, Guensler, and Bachman 2001), to date, diaries remain the
preferred method for gathering contextual and perceptual journey information, and enabling
the identi<U+FB01>cation of independently mobile trips. In adults, several approaches have been trialled
to improve travel diary data quality including GPS data as a prompt to participant recall (Stopher,
Prasad, and Zhang 2010), and time use surveys (Stopher 1992). However even in this older popu-
lation group, trip de<U+FB01>nition and journey timing were problematic, demonstrating the considerable
challenge to researchers working with children and adults alike (Auld et al. 2009).
     When combined with GIS, GPS provides a useful measure of spatiotemporal exposure to the
built environment, as effect sizes can be diluted when environmental information is limited to pre-
determined areas (Troped et al. 2010). Similar to Mackett et al. (2007b), we noted that some par-
ticipants took different routes for the trip to school on different days, visited playgrounds and
settings en route, and spent time outside the school grounds prior to school starting. As such,
GIS trips derived from travel diary information (e.g. using shortest-route methodology) may
miss potentially important environments that children encounter.
     Although this study is limited somewhat by the small speci<U+FB01>c sample, we employed an in-depth
explanation process, including checking diaries every weekday. Nesting of trips within individuals
was not considered in this study; however, the consistency in <U+FB01>ndings across the randomly selected
children indicates a relatively stable pattern in inaccuracies between children with differing journey
pro<U+FB01>les. For the purposes of this study, GPS was considered the ‘gold standard’; however, this
method is not without limitations, including potential data loss and spurious data, loss of signal
in urban jungles, and issues with battery life (Badland et al. 2010; Oliver et al. 2010). To mitigate
these issues, GPS units with high validity and reliability were used (Duncan, Oliver, and MacRae
2011), and an intensive data collection process was employed, in particular, visiting the school daily
to download data, reinforce methods, and charge and test GPS units.
     Active travel and independent mobility offer important opportunities for children to accumu-
late physical activity for improved health and development, and for the acquisition of skills and
behaviours for lifelong health promotion. Despite this, evidence suggests that both behaviours
have decreased in children in recent decades. Accurate measurement of children’s travel beha-
viours is fundamental to understanding associates and determinants of active travel and indepen-
dent mobility. This information is essential to the development and implementation of ef<U+FB01>cacious

                                                                             Children’s Geographies           255
interventions to support and encourage these behaviours. To date, no best practice approach for
measuring these behaviours exists. Travel diaries are widely used, and the use of GPS monitoring
is becoming more commonplace. This study provides the <U+FB01>rst objective evidence for the validity
of children’s self-reported journeys and brings into question the use of travel diaries for this
purpose. Although children’s travel diaries may confer contextual journey information, they
may not provide completely accurate information on journey sequencing. Reasons for this are
likely to be multifaceted, including children’s differing concepts of what constitutes a trip.
Using less intensive approaches than those employed in the current study is likely to increase
travel diary inaccuracies. A combined approach of GPS and travel diary is recommended to
gather a comprehensive understanding of children’s journey characteristics. Future studies may
also bene<U+FB01>t from considering these issues in larger samples to explore the potential contribution
of individual factors in<U+FB02>uencing variability in agreement.
Acknowledgements
The Kids in the City study is supported by a three-year research grant from the Health Research Council of
New Zealand (grant number 10/497). The funding body was not involved in the design, conduct, data col-
lection, management, or publication of the study. Nicola Tavae is supported by a PhD scholarship from the
Centre for Social and Health Outcomes Research and Evaluation (SHORE) and Te Ropu Whariki. The
authors also gratefully acknowledge the participants who completed the study, schools and teachers involved
in participant recruitment and data collection, territorial authorities for providing the GIS data sets, and Chris
Ou (Housing New Zealand Corporation) for assisting with the GIS data set.
References
Auld, J., C. Williams, A. Mohammadian, and P. Nelson. 2009. “An Automated GPS-Based Prompted Recall
     Survey with Learning Algorithms.” Journal of Transportation Letters: The International Journal of
     Transportation Research 1 (1): 59–79.
Badland, H. M., M. J. Duncan, M. Oliver, J. S. Duncan, and S. Mavoa. 2010. “Examining Commute Routes:
     Applications of GIS and GPS Technology.” Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine 15 (5): 327–
     330.
Badland, H. M., and M. Oliver. 2011. “Child Independent Mobility: Making the Case, and Understanding
     How the Physical and Social Environments Impact on the Behaviour”. In Urbanization and the
     Global Environment, edited by E. Turunen and A. Koskinen, 51–79. Hauppauge, NY: NOVA
     Science Publishers.
Badland, H. M., M. Oliver, M. J. Duncan, and P. Schantz. 2011. “Measuring Children’s Independent
     Mobility: Comparing Objective and Self-report Approaches.” Children’s Geographies 9 (2): 263–271.
Duncan, J. S., M. Oliver, and D. MacRae. 2011. “Positional Accuracy of Five Different Portable GPS
     Receivers Under a Variety of Environmental Conditions.” 2011 active living research annual confer-
     ence, San Diego, CA, February 22–24.
Faulkner, G. E. J., R. N. Buliung, K. F. Parminder, and C. Fusco. 2009. “Active School Transport, Physical
     Activity Levels and Body Weight of Children and Youth: A Systematic Review.” Preventive Medicine
     48 (1): 3–8.
Hillman, M., J. Adams, and J. Whitelegg. 1990. One False Move … A Study of Children‘s Independent
     Mobility. London: Policy Studies Institute.
Jago, R., and T. Baranowski. 2004. “Non-curricular Approaches for Increasing Physical Activity in Youth: A
     Review.” Preventive Medicine 39 (1): 157–163.
Klesges, L. M., T. Baranowski, B. Beech, K. Cullen, D. M. Murray, J. Rochon, and C. Pratt. 2004. “Social
     Desirability Bias in Self-reported Dietary, Physical Activity and Weight Concerns Measures in 8- to 10-
     year-old African-American Girls: Results from the Girls Health Enrichment Multisite Studies (GEMS).”
     Preventive Medicine 38 (Supplement): S78–S87.
Lubans, D. R., C. A. Boreham, P. Kelly, and C. E. Foster. 2011. “The Relationship Between Active Travel to
     School and Health-Related Fitness in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review.” International
     Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 8 (1): 5.

