                                                                  Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 282–287



                                                                Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                       Journal of Transport & Health
                                                      journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jth




They go straight home – don’t they? Using global positioning systems
to assess adolescent school-travel patterns
Christine Voss a,n, Meghan Winters b, Amanda D. Frazer c, Heather A. McKay d
a
  University of British Columbia – Department of Orthopaedics, Centre for Hip Health and Mobility, 684C-2635 Laurel Street, Vancouver, BC,
Canada V5Z 1M9
b
  Simon Fraser University – Faculty of Health Sciences, Blusson Hall, Rm 11522, 8888 University Dr, Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 1S6
c
  University of British Columbia – Department of Family Practice, Centre for Hip Health and Mobility, 7/F, 2635 Laurel Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 1M9
d
  University of British Columbia – Department of Orthopaedics and Family Practice, Centre for Hip Health and Mobility, 7/F, 2635 Laurel Street, Vancouver,
BC, Canada V5Z 1M9




art ic l e i nf o                                       a b s t r a c t

Available online 13 October 2014                        Background: Active travel to school is a potential source of physical activity for adolescents, but its
                                                        assessments often rely on assumptions around travel patterns. Global positioning system (GPS) and
Keywords:
                                                        accelerometry provide an objective assessment of physical activity from school-travel and the context in
Adolescent
Health promotion                                        which it occurs (where, when, how long).
Spatial behavior                                        Purpose: To describe school-travel patterns of adolescents and to compare estimates of physical activity
Transportation                                          during the hour before/after school – a commonly used proxy for school-travel time – with physical
Physical activity                                       activity accrued during school trips identi<U+FB01>ed through GPS (‘GPS-trips’).
                                                        Methods: Adolescents (n ¼49, 13.3 70.7 years, 37% female) from Downtown Vancouver wore an
                                                        accelerometer (GT3Xþ ) and GPS (Qstarz) for 7 days (October 2012). Minutes of moderate-to-vigorous
                                                        physical activity (MVPA) during the hour before/after school and during GPS-trips were calculated for the
                                                        n ¼130 school-trips made by 43 students. We used multilevel linear regression to assess the association
                                                        between MVPA during GPS-trips and MVPA during the hour/before school.
                                                        Results: Only 55% of school-trips were from/to home and within the hour before/after school (‘normal’).
                                                        Estimates of MVPA during the hour before/after school were higher than during GPS-trips (12.0 vs.
                                                        8.0 min). On average, MVPA during GPS-trips was linearly associated with MVPA during the hour before/
                                                        after school, suggesting that physical activity levels during the hour before/after school are broadly
                                                        re<U+FB02>ective of physical activity from school-travel.
                                                        Conclusion: GPS and accelerometry provide context-rich information relating to school-travel. The hour
                                                        before/after school may – on average – provide a simple means to crudely estimate physical activity from
                                                        school-travel when GPS are not available.
                                                                                                                         & 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

   Promoting walking and biking to school are among strategies identi<U+FB01>ed as key to combat the physical inactivity pandemic in youth
(GAPA, 2011) and one response to the call for global action to address this problem (Kohl et al., 2012). There is a compelling body of
scienti<U+FB01>c evidence that youth who walk or bike are more physically active (Larouche et al., 2014). Historically, studies that objectively
assessed physical activity from school-travel did so by <U+FB01>rst obtaining continuous measures of physical activity levels during the school day
(accelerometry), then de<U+FB01>ning time ‘windows’ post hoc for a time of day when school-travel was assumed, for example the hour before or
after school (or sometimes two hours after school), (Cooper et al., 2003; van Sluijs et al., 2009) and inferring that physical activity accrued
during these times was attributable to school-travel. However, physical activity during the hour before/after school may not be exclusively
from school-travel, which could question the validity as a proxy for physical activity from school-travel.
   Combining accelerometry with global positioning systems (GPS) provides a great opportunity to improve objective assessments of
physical activity from school-travel, because through GPS we can identify actual school-travel times. A handful of studies have started to


  n
      Corresponding author. Tel.: þ 1 604 675 2575; fax: þ 1 604 675 2576.
      E-mail addresses: christine.voss@hiphealth.ca (C. Voss), mwinters@sfu.ca (M. Winters), amanda.frazer@hiphealth.ca (A.D. Frazer), heather.mckay@ubc.ca (H.A. McKay).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2014.09.013
2214-1405/& 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

                                                        C. Voss et al. / Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 282–287                                                     283


employ this method to estimate physical activity from school-travel, (Klinker et al., 2014; Cooper et al., 2010; Southward et al., 2012) but
none described teenagers' actual school-travel patterns in terms of travel time (i.e. do they travel when we assume they do?) and
destinations (i.e. do they travel to/from home or elsewhere?). This contextual information is invaluable to planning and implementing
effective physical activity promotion strategies that speci<U+FB01>cally target school-travel. In addition, it is unclear whether school-travel times
(i.e. time of day) and destinations directly impact physical activity from school-travel, and whether the hour before/after school is a
suitable proxy for physical activity from school-travel when no GPS (or travel diaries) are available.
    Thus, the objectives were two-fold: (1) to describe adolescent school-travel patterns (from GPS) in terms of school-travel times
(i.e. time of day) and destinations (i.e. home/not home); (2) to compare estimates of physical activity from school-travel during the hour
before/after school (a commonly used proxy for school-travel time) with actual with physical activity accrued during school trips
identi<U+FB01>ed directly through GPS.


2. Methods


2.1. Participants and protocol


    With parental consent and student assent, grade 8–10 students (n ¼49, 13.3 7 0.7 years, 37% female) from the only public high school in Downtown Vancouver
participated in this study. Measurements were conducted in the school setting in October 2012. The institutional ethics committee and school board approved the study.


2.2. Instruments


    Physical activity was objectively assessed using accelerometers (GT3X þ , ActiGraph LLC, FL; recording at 30 Hz) and concurrent location using GPS units (Qstarz
BT-Q1000XT, Qstarz International Co. Ltd., Taiwan; recording at 1s). Participants were <U+FB01>tted with an elastic belt equipped with both monitors (accelerometer over the right
hip) to be worn continuously for the next 7 days (except for water-based activities). Participants turned on the GPS unit on day one of the measurement period and were
instructed not to turn them off for the remainder of the study period. We enabled the vibration sensor on the GPS unit so that the unit would go into battery-preserving sleep
mode after 10 min of no movement.


2.3. Trip identi<U+FB01>cation


     School and home addresses (from parent/guardian) were geocoded and mapped in ArcGIS v. 10.1 (Esri Inc., CA), as were aerial images of the area (City of Vancouver Open
Data) and a local street network shape<U+FB01>le (CanMaps Street<U+FB01>les, DMTI Spatial Inc., Markham, Canada). Using the Tracking Analyst tool, which visualises GPS points in a time
series, a researcher with local knowledge identi<U+FB01>ed school-trips from GPS points on weekdays that terminated at school before the end of the school day or that originated
from school. Tracks had to be of Z 30 s duration and Z 100 m distance to be considered a trip. Trip start was identi<U+FB01>ed as the <U+FB01>rst GPS point outside of home or school
ground (combination of aerial image and geocoded addresses) where speed Z 1 km/h and distance 40 m of movement, and changes from these criteria indicated trip stop
time, allowing for pauses of o 5 min (e.g. at a stop light, bus stop). Trip mode was assigned based on the overall trip speed trajectory. Trips where speeds were
predominantly Z 1 km/h and o 10 km/h were considered ‘walking’ trips (hereafter: ‘active’). For the purposes of this analysis, trips where speeds were predominantly
Z 10 km/h were considered ‘passive’ trips (including car and public transit trips). We are con<U+FB01>dent that no bicycle trips were mistaken for car trips, as only one student self-
reported sometimes cycling to school, and the GPS-trips during the measurement period for this student were clearly walking trips. All GPS-trips in this analysis were coded
by the same researcher; however, with this manual trip identi<U+FB01>cation process in our lab we have found 100% inter-rater agreement for trip mode, and an inter-rater
difference (bias) for trip-based physical activity of 0.11 min (95% CI 0.01, 0.2) – not a meaningful difference.


2.4. Data processing and statistical analyses


    Raw accelerometry data were reintegrated into 1-s epochs using ActiLife v. 6.5.4. (ActiGraph LLC, FL), and merged with GPS-trip data (as.csv) using timestamps in Stata/
MP 10.1 (StataCorp LP, TX). To visualise school-travel behaviour by time of day, we allocated the proportion of student-travel time into 5-minute time slots and plotted them
(Fig. 2). GPS-trips were coded according to trip type (home to school, elsewhere to school, school to home, school to elsewhere), and grouped as ‘normal’ if they were to/from
home and started and ended within the hour before or after school, or ‘not-normal’ if outside these parameters. From accelerometry, axis 1 (vertical) acceleration counts
were converted into minutes spent in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) (Evenson et al., 2008) during GPS-trips and hour before/after school. Mean MVPA
during the hour before/after school and during GPS-trips were calculated (Table 1) for all school-trips (n¼ 130), and for ‘normal’ school-trips (n¼ 71). Between trip-type
comparisons of MVPA (outcome variable) were assessed via multilevel linear regression, using trip type as a categorical explanatory variable (referent: ‘home to school’) and
with student as a random effect to account for clustering of trips by student (multiple school trips made by the same person are likely similar to each other). We used the
same method to assess between-mode (referent: ‘active’) differences in MVPA, and we also used multilevel regression to explain how much of the MVPA during the hour
before/after school (outcome variable) was explained by MVPA from the actual school trip (GPS-trip; explanatory variable, continuous).



3. Results and discussion

   Forty-<U+FB01>ve students had GPS data for an average duration of 3 71 days (range: 1–6). From 303 total trips, 130 were school-trips
(hereafter: GPS-trips) made by 43 students (average GPS-trip rate per student: 3.0 71.9 GPS-trips, range: 1–9).

3.1. They go straight home, don’t they?

   Almost all GPS-trips to school (n ¼57/60) originated from home, however, only two thirds of GPS-trips from school returned home
(n ¼46/70). The most common ( Z5 trips) after school destinations other than home were a community centre (12 trips by 12 students,
separately) and a park (5 trips by 5 students, travelling together). Other destinations were other residential address/neighbourhood (n ¼ 2),
elementary schools (n ¼2), restaurants (n ¼2), and a church (n ¼1).
   The proportion of school trips that both started and <U+FB01>nished within the hour before or after school is of interest, because this is a key
assumption for using the hour before/after school as estimates of school travel PA. For trips to school, three-quarters of trips started and
completed within the hour before school (n ¼46/60), whereas only 56% of trips from school did during the hour after school (n ¼ 39/70).
   Overall, only 55% of the GPS-trips were considered ‘normal’ (i.e. from/to home, completed within the hour before/after school; n ¼71/
130). This may have implications for estimating physical activity from school-travel when solely relying on using these time windows.

284                                                      C. Voss et al. / Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 282–287




Fig. 1. Volume of school travel-time across the school day. Travel to and from school occurred most often during the hour before (77%) and after (64%) school. Note that the
smaller cluster of travel time to school between 9–10 am was largely explained by a late school start on one measurement day (adjusted for in analyses). Also note the wider
distribution of travel time from school across a 4-hour window. While some early trips from school were attributed to school sport competition, most travel times outside
the hour before/after school remain unexplained. Based on n¼130 school-trips by n¼ 42 students from Vancouver, Canada (Oct 2012).




Fig. 2. Example of two students' physical activity patterns during the hour before school. Both students walked to school (light blue) and had comparable minutes of MVPA
during the hour before school, but the relative contribution from actual school-travel and other PA (i.e. arriving at school and school start) differed between the students. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this <U+FB01>gure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)


For example, trips from school to community centres or parks may result in different amounts of physical activity compared with trips
home, either because of different physical activity from transport (different travel modes, different trip times/distances), or because of
physical activity at a destination (not during travel to it). Furthermore, 30% of GPS-trips home after school started Z30 min after the <U+FB01>nal
bell (n¼ 14/46), providing additional opportunities for physical activity at school, which could also have impacted estimates of physical
activity using the hour before/after school time window. We revisit between-trip type differences in physical activity from school-travel in
Section 3.2.
   Fig. 1 provides a visual representation of volume of school-travel time at any given time of day. Overall, school-travel volumes peak
shortly before school start, and shortly after school ends. Furthermore, most (77%) of the travel-time volume to school occurred within the
hour before school, and 64% of the volume of travel-time from school occurred within the hour after school.

3.2. Assessing physical activity from school-travel: what GPS adds to current practice

    As previously outlined, physical activity from school-travel is commonly inferred from objectively measured physical activity during
the hour before/ after school, because any physical activity accrued during these time windows is thought to be attributable to physical
activity from school-travel. However, there is potential for error by this method. Speci<U+FB01>cally, we found that only 55% of the school trips
were ‘normal’ (i.e. from/to home, completed within the hour before/after school). In some cases, there may be no school-travel at all taking
place during the hour before/after school, whereas in other cases, trips to locations other than home may yield different transport-related
physical activity (e.g. different travel modes) or capture physical activity at the destination that may differ from physical activity at home
(in either direction). Fig. 2 shows examples of two students' physical activity levels during the hour before school. Both walked to school
and had comparable overall physical activity (20.7 and 22.6 min of MVPA, respectively). In Panel A most of the student's physical activity
during the hour was explained by the walk to school (85%); the student in Panel B, however, arrived at school more than half an hour
before the start of instructional time and spent most of this time being physically active. Consequently, less than half of the physical
activity during the hour before school was explained by school-travel (45%).
    We estimated physical activity from school-travel during the hour before/after school and during GPS-trips for our whole trip sample
(Table 1). On average, the hour before/after school yielded greater levels of physical activity than did the GPS-trips, which is intuitive given
the longer duration. What is of interest, however, is that both methods were able to identify signi<U+FB01>cant between-trip type differences in
physical activity, with ‘school to elsewhere’ trips having higher physical activity compared with ‘home to school’ trips (referent; ‘all’ trips
only). Similarly, both methods identi<U+FB01>ed that physical activity was higher in trips by active modes compared with passive modes

                                                       C. Voss et al. / Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 282–287                                                  285


Table 1
Physical activity from the school trip as measured during the hour before/after school (accelerometry only) or during the actual trip (accelerometry and GPS), strati<U+FB01>ed by
trip type and travel mode.

                                                                   n                           Moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA, min)a

                                                                                               Hour before/after schoolb                         Actual trip (from GPS)c

 All school trips
 All                                                               130                         12.0 76.4                                          8.0 7 5.1
   Trip typed
      Home to school                                                57                         10.9 75.8                                          6.8 7 4.0
      Elsewhere to school                                            3                         14.3 710.5e                                        5.5 7 2.6e
      School to home                                                46                         11.6 76.1                                          8.4 7 5.1
      School to elsewhere                                           24                         15.1 77.2†                                        10.6 7 6.5†
   Travel modef
      Active                                                        51                         13.4 75.9                                          8.7 7 4.3
      Passive                                                       79                         11.1 76.6                                          7.6 7 5.5

 ‘Normal’ trips (based on trip type & time)g
 All                                                                71                         11.8 74.5                                          6.5 7 4.1
   Trip typed
     Home to school                                                 44                         12.1 74.5                                          6.5 7 3.5
     School to home                                                 27                         11.3 74.6                                          6.6 7 5.1
   Travel modef
     Active                                                         34                         13.3 74.6                                          8.17 4.1
     Passive                                                        37                         10.4 74.0#                                         5.0 7 3.6#

Data are mean7 SD.
   a
       ActiGraph (GT3X þ , 1s epoch) acceleration counts converted to minutes of moderate-to-vigorous-physical-activity, MVPA (Evenson et al., 2008).
   b
       Total minutes of MVPA between 7:35–8:35 (school start bell) or between 15:03 (school stop bell)–16:03.
     c
       Total minutes of MVPA during the trip, identi<U+FB01>ed from GPS tracks (Qstarz BT-Q1000XT, 1s epoch) mapped in a Geographic Information System (ArcGIS, v. 10.1, Esri
Inc., CA).
     d
       Trip type identi<U+FB01>ed from mapped GPS tracks, using geocoded school- and home addresses (parent-reported).
     e
       Excluded from between-trip-type comparison due to low number of trips; between-trip-type comparison (multi-level model, accounting for multiple trips per
student).
     f
       Travel mode identi<U+FB01>ed from GPS tracks, primarily based on speed (see methods for details), active includes ‘walk’, passive includes ‘car’ and ‘public transit’.
     g
       ‘Normal’ trip is de<U+FB01>ned as a school trip that either originated or concluded at home based on mapped GPS tracks and that started and concluded within the hour before
or after school.
     †
       Signi<U+FB01>cantly (p o0.05) higher than ‘home to school’ (referent); between-mode comparison (multi-level model, accounting for multiple trips per student).
     #
        Signi<U+FB01>cantly (p o 0.05) lower than ‘active’ (referent).


(‘normal’ trips only). The latter especially is an important observation, because assessing between-mode differences is often a focal point
of studies that investigate physical activity from school-travel.
    We illustrate the association between the two methods for the whole sample in Fig. 3 (includes the two examples from Fig. 2). We ran
two models: one with all trips (n¼ 130) and one with only ‘normal’ trips (n ¼71). In both models, trip-based physical activity was
signi<U+FB01>cantly and positively related to physical activity during the hour before/after school (ß ¼0.63 min of MVPA, 95%CI 0.45–0.80,
p o0.001 and ß ¼0.75 min of MVPA, 95%CI 0.59–0.91, p o0.001, respectively). It is worth noting that the <U+FB01>rst model had more outliers than
the second model, i.e. extreme cases that deviated notably from the simple regression line (and in both directions, see Fig. 3). These are
likely instances where either after-school physical activity took place at school (high physical activity during hour before/after school, but
low physical activity during GPS-trip), or active travel to/from school occurred outside of the hour before/after school (low physical
activity during hour before/after school, but high physical activity during GPS-trip). It would appear as if both types of outliers occurred at
comparable rates, thereby only marginally affecting the overall linear relationship between the two types of school-travel physical activity
estimates (Fig. 3). In combination with the previously described ability of both methods to detect between trip type and mode differences
in physical activity, it seems as if physical activity estimates from the hour before/after school hour may serve as crude estimates of school-
travel MVPA overall when no GPS is available. However, it is worth noting that physical activity from school-travel was higher during the
hour before/after school in most cases compared with physical activity during GPS-trips. We would therefore advise to identify (e.g. via
questionnaire) any physical activity and/or travel patterns that may impact estimates of travel-related physical activity, for example after-
school club participation which may lead to higher, non-travel related physical activity during the hour after school.

3.3. Is GPS the holy grail for school-travel research?

   Through use of GPS, this study identi<U+FB01>ed that only 55% of school-trips were ‘normal’, indicating that teenagers in our sample frequently
travelled to destinations other than home or not during the hour before/after school. Although this did not seem to meaningfully impact
overall estimates of physical activity from school-travel – in this sample at least – it highlights the value of GPS to provide context of travel
(time, destination, route), in addition to providing objective estimates of physical activity from travel (Duncan et al., 2009). A recent study
in Danish youth, using GPS and accelerometry, described gender-speci<U+FB01>c differences in physical activity from travel, school and leisure
using these methods(Klinker et al., 2014); such context-speci<U+FB01>c information is invaluable for planning effective interventions to promote
physical activity in youth.
   Nevertheless, GPS has some limitations. The battery life of the GPS units (without a recharge at home) resulted in only 3 days on
average of GPS data in our study. It is unknown how many days might be needed in order to capture individual student's habitual school-
travel patterns, but future studies might incorporate protocols for charging to maximise GPS data acquisition during the typical 7 day
study period. Signal loss or delay in acquisition is also a challenge for <U+FB01>eld-based GPS data collection. We measured the distance of missing

286                                                     C. Voss et al. / Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 282–287




Fig. 3. Associations between physical activity during GPS-trips and during the hour before/after school. MVPA – moderate-to-vigorous physical activity; GPS – global
positioning system; ‘Normal’ school-trip – to/from home, completely occurred within the hour before/after school. Note that the model with ‘all trips’ had more outliers
(black dots) than the model with ‘normal trips’ only. These are likely instances where either after-school physical activity took place at school (high physical activity during
hour before/after school, but low physical activity during GPS-trip), or active travel to/from school occurred outside of the hour before/after school (low physical activity
during hour before/after school, but high physical activity during GPS-trip). Based on n ¼130 school-trips by n¼ 42 students from Vancouver, Canada (Oct 2012).


trip segments along the street network by extending GPS track trajectories for ‘home to school’ and ‘school to home’ trips (n ¼103),
because only for these trips could we be certain to know the correct trip origins and destinations. We found that on average, GPS-trips
were missing E14% of the trip distance in GPS points. This was mostly the result of a delayed signal <U+FB01>x at the trip start, which was
markedly higher for ‘home to school’ trips (E 467 m) than for ‘school to home’ trips (E71 m). This is likely the result of GPS units not
having suf<U+FB01>cient ‘warm up’ time in the morning, as well as the fact that GPS units typically require a longer time to <U+FB01>rst acquire a signal <U+FB01>x
when they are in motion compared with when they are stationary (Stopher et al., 2008). We did not instruct participants to wait for a
signal <U+FB01>x (e.g. a beep) before starting their trip, because we considered this an additional participant burden and consistent compliance to
be unrealistic. Missing GPS data may result in underestimation of trip metrics like duration, distance and physical activity from travel. We
repeated our analyses for trips who had o15% or o1% distance missing; although physical activity during GPS-trips was marginally
higher when smaller proportions of the trips were missing, we found that the association between physical activity during the hour
before/after school and during GPS-trips remained similar overall (not shown). Thus, we suggest that in this study, signal loss appears to
have affected school-trips of low and high physical activity equally, on average. Finally, erratic GPS data were observed more frequently in
urban canyons (clusters of high-rise buildings), and although a known phenomenon, (Schipperijn et al., 2014) this presents a real
challenge for studies in urban centres.

3.4. Limitations

   We acknowledge several additional limitations to this analysis. This study comprised of a convenience sample of grade 8–10 high
school students from downtown Vancouver. Downtown Vancouver includes some of North America's most walkable neighbourhoods,
which are also well-served by public transit. Furthermore, no students at this high school travelled by school bus as a result of the
conservative local school bus eligibility criteria (Z4.8 km from nearest school) (Vancouver School Board, 2014) and the compact
catchment area of this particular school (4.2 km2; furthest distance to school along street network: 3.0 km). The unique local setting likely
impacts the transferability of our <U+FB01>ndings to other communities. The current high school had an ‘open gym’ policy, meaning that students
could autonomously use the school gym facilities between 8:00 am and 8:35 am (school start) on most school days. With no information
on who made use of this, we cannot further explore the impact of this policy on school-travel patterns (i.e. do they purposely get to school
earlier) and physical activity from school-travel (higher physical activity during the hour before school, see Fig. 2B). Likewise, provision of
after school clubs – either at school or a different location, such as community centres – may impact school-travel patterns and related
physical activity. Future studies should give consideration to these factors in their local contexts.

3.5. Implications for practice

   GPS and accelerometry combined provide a context-rich insight into school-travel in terms of travel times (time of day and trip
duration), destinations and physical activity from school-travel. Using GPS can also provide information on actual routes taken, which
further enables the study of route characteristics that may in<U+FB02>uence school-travel behaviours. When no GPS is available, our <U+FB01>ndings
suggest that the hour before/after school may serve as a crude proxy for physical activity from school-travel, on average. However, we
identi<U+FB01>ed that students frequently travelled outside of the hour before/after school, and that they commonly went to places other than
home after school, which lead to outliers at the trip-level. Thus, we urge future studies to give consideration to these factors in their local
contexts (for example via questionnaire), and explore whether they may impact their school-travel analyses.


4. Conclusion

    Many environmental (neighbourhood, school) and individual factors (sex, age) likely contribute to complex school-travel behaviours in
adolescents, particularly after school. GPS and accelerometry provide context-rich information relating to school-travel, but using the hour
before/after school may provide a simple means to estimate physical activity from school-travel when GPS is not available. Further
research examining adolescent school-travel behaviours should seek location- and school-speci<U+FB01>c information that likely impacts timing
of school-travel, such as ‘open door’ policies for school gyms, as well as before- and after-school clubs and activities.

