Children’s active travel, local activity spaces and wellbeing: A case study
in Perth, WA

abstract
Children’s neighborhood spaces have the potential to enhance their wellbeing by affording active and
independent travel. Drawing on a case study of 49 children aged between 9 and 13, living in a suburb
of Perth, Western Australia, this study adopts a capability approach to understand how children’s travel
in the neighborhood environment supports their wellbeing. A mixed methods approach is used to explore
children’s activity spaces: 1) GPS tracks; 2) children’s activity diaries; 3) surveys; and 4) children’s photo
pictorial collages. Activity spaces and affordances are used to inform the capability framework. We compare 
the realized local activity spaces (as confidence ellipses) to the potential activity spaces, indicative of
the children’s potential to achieve wellbeing, and draw on children’s photographic and pictorial evaluations
of their neighborhood to provide a qualitative perspective on the range of affordances. The results
show substantial constraints to the children’s active travel and independent mobility, contrasting with
the positive view of the neighborhood the children hold. Children were mainly chauffeured at short distances 
that could have easily been walked or cycled, yet the photo-collage reveals a rich diversity of
places and activities children access and desire to reach and use. The capability framework offers insight
into some of the factors limiting children’s travel, but also highlights the agency children have in shaping
their own travel behavior.


1. Introduction: children’s travel in urban environments                                    

Pioneering studies on children’s urban and rural lives by geography 
and planning scholars in the late twentieth century, such                             
as Lynch and Banerjee (1977), Ward (1978), and Hillman et al.                               
(1990) have led to the increased recognition of the place-based                             
effects on the wellbeing of children. The local environment can                           
afford children space for active travel (walking and cycling), and                         
consequently the means to achieve various types of wellbeing benefits. 
Active travel enables children to access places important for                        
their development and social connectedness such as schools, parks,                         
libraries, shops and recreation centers (Freeman and Tranter, 2010;                   
Loebach and Gilliland, 2016a). Children who walk or cycle to                               
school engage in routine physical activity and are also more likely                      
to engage in other types of moderate to vigorous activity within                            
school environments and extracurricular activities that support                             
their physical health (Mackett et al., 2005). Importantly, walking                          
and cycling, unlike the car, are modes of travel that children can                          
undertake without adult accompaniment, and therefore also afford                            

children independence. Being independently mobile has been
linked with higher rates of physical activity in children (Mackett
et al., 2007; Wen et al., 2009) and the development of cognitivive
skills through providing opportunities to develop spatial awareness 
(Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002), as well as increased resilience
and strategies to deal with risk (Malone, 2007). Safety and security
represent main concerns for parents, leading them to restrict independent 
mobility of their children (Garrad, 2009; Jago et al., 2009;
Ergler et al., 2013; Foster et al., 2014). As an alternative to limiting
mobility, the accompaniment of children (with siblings, parents, or
friends) becomes a means to make a safer, secure environment
enabling active travel (Faulkner et al., 2015).
There has been an observed decline in children’s independent
mobility and active travel in developed countries (Faulkner et al.,
2015; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016b). This is also the case in Australia, 
where the rates of children’s active and independent travel
to school has decreased since the 1990s from 61% to 32% in 2012
(Schoeppe et al., 2015); this is despite growing evidence that local
environments provide many opportunities for enhancing children’s
wellbeing. Children are now more dependent on their parents than
previous generations, and are now labelled as the ‘‘bubble
wrapped”, ‘‘back seat”, and ‘‘battery reared” generations, compared
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
to the ‘‘free range” previous generations (Malone, 2007; Loebach
and Gilliland, 2016a). The potential reasons for the decline are
numerous, with research identifying influential factors such as
the increased distances between schools and households

(Gleeson and Sipe, 2006; Malone, 2007; Schoeppe et al., 2015
Curtis et al., 2015); increased household incomes and car ownership 
and use (Timperio et al., 2004; Malone, 2007; Van der Ploeg,
et al. 2008; Woolcock et al., 2010); more traffic on the roads leading 
to increased real and perceived risk of pedestrian injuries
(Timperio et al., 2004); and the overall perceived convenience of
car travel compared to walking and cycling (Lang et al., 2011).
The modern lifestyle children lead is also increasingly characterized 
by a range of extracurricular activities (Barker, 2011), thus
necessitating increased mobility in urban settings.
Any inquiry into the relationship between children’s active and
independent travel and their wellbeing is required to address a
range of individual, social and cultural factors. The World Health
Organization (WHO, 1948) defines health as ‘‘a state of complete
physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence
of disease or infirmity”. Multiple sources of data are therefore necessary 
to provide insight into this multi-faceted concept of wellbeing,
which encompasses social and household relations, individual
factors, and the built environment. Complex, multifaceted problems
 call for different methodologies to triangulate, validate, integrate
information and provide complementing views of the
researched phenomena, consequently enabling deeper understanding 
of the key factors. A mixed methods approach has been
used to understand children’s health and social capital (Baum
et al., 2009); independent mobility (O’Brien et al., 2000) and everyday 
mobility (Christensen et al., 2011); development of a sense of
place (Lim and Barton, 2010); and experience of local environments 
(Mitchell et al., 2007). Researchers have responded in different 
ways, some for example drawing upon interviews with
children (Ergler et al., 2013; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016b),
whereas others have utilized visual methods and photography to
situate children within the contexts they are evaluating (Mitchell
et al., 2007).

This study investigates the links between children’s travel in
their local neighborhood and wellbeing, using a case study of a
middle-class suburban neighborhood, centered on a primary
school in Perth, Western Australia. Two concepts, activity spaces
and affordances, are incorporated within a capabilities framework
(Sen, 1993). A mixed-methods research design is applied for investigation. 
The combination of methods includes: multivariate data
analysis of children’s travel behavior; spatial analysis and visualization 
of realized and potential activity spaces; and a content
analysis of photographs taken by children during their daily activities, 
reflective of the quality of their local activity spaces. The
methods used provide insight into the range, mode and volume
of travel and children’s reflection on their local neighborhoods.
The paper provides a ‘proof-of-concept’ for how to combine rich
sources of data in examining children’s affordances and capabilities/functionings 
as ways of measuring wellbeing in relation to travel 
and activity spaces. In doing so, the research informs future
studies utilizing mixed method research design to achieve a better
understanding of how children’s wellbeing is shaped by their local
travel activity spaces.

The structure of the paper is the following: Section 2 reviews
the relevant literature on the capability approach with a focus on
children’s active travel, then discusses the potential for activity

spaces and affordances to capture travel behavior relevant to children’s 
wellbeing within the local urban environment. Section 3
describes the case study and sources of data, while Section 4 presents 
the methods of analysis used for investigation. Results of
the analysis (multivariate statistics, visualization of activity spaces,

and photo collage analysis) are given in Section 5 and discussed in
Section 6.


2. Background

2.1. Children’s wellbeing and the capability approach

There is now a well-developed body of literature linking routine
travel behavior and people’s wellbeing. Individuals’ subjective
wellbeing, through happiness or feelings of wellbeing, has been
linked to travel or mobility via the experience of travelling and
the activities undertaken whilst travelling, access to activities that
travel affords, and wellbeing associated with the potential for travel, 
even if not realized (Reardon and Abdallah, 2013; de Vos et al.,
2013). However, a critique of subjective wellbeing is that individuals 
may adapt their preferences and mental states to sub-optimal 
living conditions and therefore not be fully aware of the
potential to enhance their wellbeing (Qizilbash, 2006). Others have
argued that an enriched understanding of the role of travel and
mobility on wellbeing requires going beyond subjective conceptualizations 
of wellbeing (Nordbakke and Schwanen, 2013).
A capability approach offers a potentially rich exploration of the
relationship between children’s travel in their local neighborhood
and wellbeing. Developed by Sen (1993) and Nussbaum (2000) to
address limitations in evaluating wellbeing in the field of development 
economics, the capability approach has been increasingly
used as an evaluative framework in a diverse range of disciplines
including design (Oosterlaken, 2009), urban planning (Basta,
2016), and transport planning (Beyazit, 2011). The capability
approach goes beyond evaluating wellbeing as an end state (such
as the subjective experience of being happy), and instead conceptualizes 
wellbeing as having the capability to freely select alternative 
combinations of various valuable functionings, which are
different ways of ‘doing’ or ‘being’ (Sen, 1993). According to the
capability approach, individuals have the freedom to reason and
select functionings, such as being healthy or being independently
mobile, from a set of all possible functionings they could achieve,
known as a capability set. These sets of capabilities are dependent
on an individual’s capacity to convert resources available within
particular social, structural and spatial contexts. Fig. 1 illustrates
the basic elements of the capability approach.
The multifaceted conceptualization of wellbeing intrinsic to the
capability approach creates a number of possibilities for understanding 
the role of local travel in shaping children’s wellbeing.
As Robeyns (2006) explains, the capability approach is deliberatively 
equivocal and relies on specifications of the evaluative
framework to be made fit-for-purpose. This means differential
weighting may be given to specific components within the framework. 
For example, an evaluation may focus on conversion factors
over achieved functionings. For this purpose, the capabilities
approach has been used to understand the relationship between
travel behavior and wellbeing in marginalized groups including
older person’s mobility resources in Stockholm, Sweden (Ryan
et al., 2015), and has been used to inform transport related factors
relevant to minimum incomes standards in the UK (Smith et al.,
2012). Alternatively, a framework may place greater emphasis on
the choices individuals make when selecting available functionings. 
This may be relevant when an individual has a capability
set that supports health and wellbeing, but makes decisions that
do not allow them to achieve health-related functionings.


2.2. Activity spaces and affordances

To adapt a capability approach to evaluate the potential and
actualized functionings associated with children’s local settings it
is necessary to use appropriate conceptual and methodological
apparatus to explore key components of the capability approach.
We draw upon two such tools for this purpose: activity spaces
and affordances, which are presented in detail next.

2.2.1. Activity spaces
Few tools are able to simultaneously account for space and time
in understanding daily activity and travel patterns (Hägerstrand,
1970; Kwan, 2000; Weber and Kwan, 2003). Activity spaces for
human activities integrate many dimensions that underlie spatial
behavior: the distribution and concentration of the activities, and
the intensity of using space to satisfy those activity needs, given
various institutional, budget, social and temporal constraints.
Activity spaces used in transport reflect the demand for daily activities 
conducted by individuals in various locations. They also indi-
cate the ability of urban and transport services to satisfy that need,
thus, they encapsulate both demand and supply. If the opportunities 
are plenty and lie near to home locations, travelling further to
reach desired destinations is not necessary. Conversely, the lack of
diverse services and opportunities, combined with various constraints, 
will require larger urban areas to be covered. Activity
spaces are useful not only for measuring the spatial arrangements
of travel and the use of urban space to satisfy daily activity needs,
but also for indicating the spatial awareness of the individuals
traversing the space (Newsome et al., 1998; Golledge, 2002;
Axhausen et al., 2004; Botte, 2015).

As expected, activity spaces are strongly conditioned by the key
fixed locations of the household or individual activities: home,
work, school and other frequently visited activity locations. They
were coined ‘‘pegs” of activity by Golledge and Stimson (1987),
as the schedule of daily activities depends on them, and consequently, 
the shape, scale and inherent structure of resulting activity 
space geometries. However, for children, the local activity space
can contain opportunities to access ‘third places’, places other than
home and school that provide opportunities for children to navigate
the unfamiliar (Witten et al., 2015). Whereas most studies
looked at households and adults, there has been some derivation
of activity spaces for children and students (Christian et al.,
2015; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016a). For example, Christian et al.
(2015) measured activity space as road network distances from
home and determined the number of opportunities within 400
and 1600 m activity spaces to understand relationships between
exposure to neighborhood destinations and time in front of a television
or computer screen.

A characteristic of activity spaces that contributes to an evaluation 
of capabilities is that a distinction can made between a potential 
activity space and a realized activity space (Patterson and Farber,
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94                                             
ual framework (adapted from Robeyns, 2005).
2015). Potential activity spaces reflect conditions where activities
may be conducted locally, but for some reason the urban space is
not used or is underutilized. It can be hypothesized that a child
who has a large realized activity space has a larger capability set,
or available functionings, to choose from. A more restricted local
activity space may limit children’s quality of life if it reduces access
to activities such as play, social interaction or exploring. Fleuret
and Atkinson (2007) have highlighted the difficulty to accurately
measure potentials, which means that usually actualized capabilities 
are measured.

2.2.2. Affordances

The second conceptual tool, the notion of affordance, has been
used widely in relation to children’s relationship with their local
environment (Heft, 1988; Chawla and Heft, 2002; Kytta, 2002;
Rudner, 2012; Yatiman et al., 2012; Ergler et al., 2013). In New
Zealand, Ergler et al. (2013) used affordances to study various contextual 
influences on children’s wellbeing through play. The concept 
of affordances is drawn from Gibson’s (1979) theory, posing
that we perceive the environment, not in terms of its appearance
of form, but through the various functions that its form and materiality 
affords us. A tree, for example, can have a number of affordances 
for children including the capacity to climb, as a place to
rest, or providing some connection to nature. Kyttä (2004) theorized 
that affordances can be ‘actualized’ or ‘potential’. Kyttä
(2004) developed a typology of potential affordance separated into
three interdependent fields: the field of promoted action, or culturally 
and socially appropriate affordance; the field of free action, or
the emergent and latent potential for environments to support
new affordance through adaptation and reflexivity of individuals;
and the field of constrained action, where environments settings
or features limit affordances.

In combination, activity spaces and affordances have been used
to explore children’s activities and associated wellbeing in local
environments. In Canada, Loebach and Gilliland (2016b) combined
GPS and subjective data sets to explore the size of children’s neighborhood 
activity space and the affordances associated with independent 
play. However, to our knowledge there is no research
that uses these concepts within a capability framework. By using
a capability approach, combined with the concept of affordances,
it is possible to interrogate the multiple domains where children’s
wellbeing is shaped by their local travel. Affordances potentially
offer insight into wellbeing from a capability perspective, as they
represent the functional qualities of the environment and enable
or restrict different ways of ‘doing’ or ‘being’. Furthermore, the
notion of potential affordances provides insights into conversion
factors that enhance and limit the ability of children to translate

resources into a capability set and then allow them to freely choose
a range of functionings that define their wellbeing. Yet, an integrated 
view of the wellbeing, making use of affordances and functionings 
(Sen, 1993), which are assessed using objective and
subjective measures such as activity spaces and photo-collages,
has not emerged. Realized activity spaces derived from children’s
regular walking and cycling behavior provide a useful connection
to a capabilities because they indicate the spatial capacity of children 
to actualize affordances within their local neighborhood
through active and independent mobility. Fig. 2 illustrates the conceptual 
framework informing this research. We see this paper as an
important contribution to understanding new ways in which travel
affects children’s wellbeing.

3. Data collection

3.1. Case study and sample

Given the need to explore children’s perceptions and behavior
across multiple spatial and social domains – household, school,
recreation, social networks – a case study approach was used to
understand the children’s realized and potential functionings
within their walkable neighborhood activity space. A case study
approach allows a rich understanding of the social and built environments 
contexts that are relevant to children’s wellbeing. The
case study was a primary school in a suburb of Perth, WA, approximately
12 km from the Perth CBD, and 5 km from the coastal city
of Fremantle. Fig. 3 illustrates the regional context of the case
study.

The neighborhood surrounding the primary school has seen
gradual subdivision of lots between two major highways since
the 1950s resulting in the land use being predominantly a patch-work 
of primarily residential cells with varied road network
designs (mixed grid pattern, curvilinear, and cul-de-sac street
designs). The urban form is typical of much suburban development
in Australian cities developed at that time. It is primarily low density 
residential housing with small suburban shopping centres.
Some light industrial land uses are scattered amongst the residential 
area, with the concentration of industry increasing in close
proximity to a major highway that dissected the area to the south
of the school. The city has over 600 hectares of open space, distributed
across over 200 parks. According to Western Australian
State Government policy the school was classified as a local intake
area school (WA Department of Education, 2015), meaning priority

is given to students living within 1.25 km. The pattern of land use
and urban form is consistent over the enrolment catchment of the
school. The socio-economic status of the LGA was higher than the
average for the Perth metropolitan area (ABS, 2012): average
weekly household income of AUD$1619 compared to AUD$1459
for the total metropolitan area; and 77.1% home ownership
amongst the families in the study (n = 38) compared to 69.1% in
the metropolitan area.

The recruitment of participants was conducted with consultation
and assistance from the principal and teachers in the school.

Children within three school year groups (141 in total) were verbally
 briefed and provided with written information regarding
the research project. Of these children, 49 participated. Both children
and parents completed surveys on travel patterns, independent
mobility and perceptions of the neighborhood. The
participant year groups consisted of children aged between nine
and 13 years old. This age group was selected because it represented
 the ages children in developed countries begin to become
independently mobile (Hillman et al., 1990), although it is important
 to note there is variation across different cultural contexts
(Waygood and Susilo, 2011).


3.2. Data sources

3.2.1. Geospatial data

To establish the children’s potential and actual local activity
spaces, the 49 children were given GPS devices and asked to attach
the devices to their arms for four days: two weekdays and two
weekend days. Given the limited number of GPS devices (20), the
tracking was undertaken across three different weeks, from 31st
May to 28th June 2012 (first group – 19 children; second group –
20 children; third group – 10 children). For validation purposes,
39 of the 49 children also completed travel diaries on the days they
carried GPS. The weather on the days the children wore the GPS
devices was mild, with some short periods of light rainfall.
The GPS were set to record locations at 15-s intervals, resulting
in about half a million GPS points. In the software ArcGIS 10.2.2,
groups of GPS points representing different trips were manually
identified using a combination of information sources: Landgate
aerial photography, Open Street Map topographic maps, the children’s 
travel diaries, the ‘Distance’ field recorded by the GPS, Google 
Street View and the local knowledge of the researcher who
regularly cycles in the vicinity of the school.
A ‘trip’ was considered to occur when the child moved to a new
cadastral location (e.g., going from home to school), but not when
they were moving around within a location (e.g., running around
inside a park). Also, when the child had not changed her/his location 
for more than two minutes, this was considered a stop
between trips. When the child was indoors, no trip was recorded.
The process was time-consuming, but assisted the research team
to obtain a high degree of accuracy and remove known technical
and administration errors. A total of 471 trips were identified.
Each group of GPS points representing a trip was given a unique
identification number and linked to a database created from the
completed travel diaries. The GPS points were also attributed with
a travel mode, using the same classification as the trip diaries
(walking, cycling, car, public transport, other). This was manually
assigned based on an interpretation of speed, route and time of
day. For validation purposes, when possible, the mode recorded
by the child in the travel diary was compared to the inferred travel
mode. Next, the points were converted to a line GIS file where each
line represents the route of a trip, and for which distance and duration 
calculations were made. Each line was attributed with an origin 
and destination, primarily to identify trips starting or ending at
‘‘home”.

3.2.2. Survey data

The 49 children and their parents also completed surveys. The
purpose of the surveys was to gain insight into individual and
household scale factors related to children’s mobility, and also
the licences that parents imposed on their children to travel independently 
in their neighborhood. The licences represent an important 
capability for children, giving them the freedom to expand
their potential range of available functionings. Four licences to travel, 
adapted from Hillman et al. (1990) were categorized: the
licence to travel to school independently; the licence to travel from                                
school independently; the licence to cross roads alone; and the
licence to ride a bike on a main street alone. Demographic information 
was also collected.


3.2.3. Photo-collage

A photo-collage method drawing on an approach used by
Castonguay and Jutras (2009) was conducted with the same group
of children who completed the survey. The intent was to capture
children’s perceptions and evaluations of achieved, potential and
constrained affordances (Kyttä, 2004) in their local neighborhood.
The children were given disposable cameras and asked to take photographs 
of what they liked and hated about their neighborhood.
The exercise took place a week before the first GPS data collection
in order to not influence normal daily travel activity. After the photographs 
were developed, the children were asked to construct
three thematic collages using their photographs, annotations and
drawings. The three themes were: ‘‘What I love about my neighborhood” 
(actualized affordances); ‘‘What I hate about my neighborhood” 
(constrained affordances); and ‘‘What I think my perfect
neighborhood is” (perceived, but not actualized affordances), indicating 
elements of an ideal local neighborhood space. The annotations 
and drawings were particularly useful for the ‘perfect
neighborhood’ collages, as they allowed children to freely imagine
a range of functionings that could be afforded in local activity
spaces. 144 photo-collages were collected; 48 each of the ‘Hate’,
‘Love’, and ‘Perfect’ collages. The photo-collage data contributed
to an understanding of the range of functionings afforded by children’s 
local activity spaces, and the method provided an evaluative
space complementary to the open and reflective nature of the
capability approach to understanding wellbeing.


4. Analysis

4.1. Multivariate analysis

A combination of multivariate statistics, visualization and geo-spatial 
analytics was applied to understand the role of local travel
in enhancing children’s wellbeing. Realized activity spaces (RAS)
for each child were determined using a confidence ellipse (two
standard deviations, 95%), 50 m trip buffer and convex hull in Arc-GIS, 
based on all active trips that started or ended at home. The
choice of three types of activity spaces metrics responds to the limitations 
of a single measure to represent the individual’s spatial
experiences (e.g., Axhausen et al., 2004; Rai et al., 2007; Botte,
2015), each definition emphasizing certain characteristics of the
spatial spread. Standard distances (circle buffer with the radius
equal to the standard deviation of distances from home or other
set value) entail symmetry around home, therefore tend to exacerbate 
the effect of spatial outliers; convex hulls cover the maximum
geographical extent of the data, considering all points equally
important, thus may potentially exacerbate the effect of spatial
outliers; buffers of routes (‘network bands’) tend to underestimate
the activity spaces and emphasize the travel over the fixed locations, 
requiring information on routes; confidence ellipses are less
sensitive to outliers, are easy to compute, and weigh the activity
space towards the most frequented locations, but they may overestimate 
the size of activity spaces.

The RAS were then compared with a potential activity space,
defined as an ellipse with the same orientation and axes’ ratio as
the RAS confidence ellipse, but with the length of the long axis representing 
a 60 min walk, (30 min walk each way along the axis
from the centre of the RAS) at the average walking speed for that
child (see Table 3 below). For the two children who had no walking
trips (only cycling), the average walking speed of all children was
used. This comparison was expected to provide some indication


on the extent to which children have the potential to use their
opportunities to be physically active in their neighborhood, given
the restrictions applied by their parents. Our hypothesis is that
enriched spatial experiences of children (larger RAS) correspond
to greater perceived and actualized affordances, with positive
effects on wellbeing, whereas smaller RAS compared to potential
activity spaces are indicative of constrained actions/affordances.

4.2. Content analysis photo-collages

A thematic coding of the content of children’s photo-collages
was conducted using Hyperresearch, a qualitative analytic software 
tool. Affordances were identified in the photo-collages using
an analytic framework drawing on literature on behavior settings
(Heft, 1988). Four categories were used to guide the coding of
images and accompanying text: the activities featured in the
images or texts; the objects prominently framed in the image,
and sometimes drawn next to photographs; the emotions, attitudes 
or affect noted in any text; and the place or setting where
the photograph was taken, and/or taken from. A frequency analysis
of codes was conducted across each of the four categories. Then, a
qualitative analysis of the main themes identified actualized, constrained 
and perceived affordances captured by the collages. Affordances 
indicated the functionings available to children in their
local environments. Following a capability approach, positive functionings 
identified in the photocollages, either realized or latent,
were assumed to be associated with positive states of wellbeing.
Cross-analysis of affordances and gender, age, level of independent
mobility, and extent of RAS, provided insight into the factors that
constrained the children’s active travel behavior and hence potentially 
their wellbeing.

5. Results

5.1. Descriptive statistics

The sample included 18 boys and 31 girls, mostly 10 years old
or over (Table 1). Cross-tabulations of age and responses to the four
licences (travel TO school; travel FROM school; licence to cross
main roads; and licence to ride a bike on main roads) indicated that
12 children did not have any independent mobility (parents
answered ‘no’ to all licence questions), while nine children were
independently mobile, and the remaining had some constraints.
No significant differences were noticed in licences granted to girls
and boys (p  0.05). Given the small sample size, care has been
taken to avoid generalizations based on the analysis.
Statistics of children’s daily travel are provided in Table 2 and of
their individual walking trips in Table 3. Table 2 shows that a third
of the sample did not report any active travel and that boys and
girls did not differ significantly (p > 0.05) in the overall average
duration and distance of their daily GPS recorded trips.1 On average, 
the children made 27% of their trips by active modes of transport. 
Active travel represents only 2.2% of the total distance, but
15% of the daily travel time of the children. Weather conditions
did not have any significant (p > 0.05) impact on the children’s
active travel.

The results indicate a variation, and whereas girls record longer
total distances and times by all travel modes, boys engaged in
more active travel on average and travelled for longer distances
by walking or cycling. This was also found by previous research

and is attributed to the higher independent mobility levels boys
enjoy compared to girls (Schoeppe et al., 2015). Only two children
achieved 60 min of physical activity from travel, so the majority
failed to meet the WHO recommendation of daily physical activity
for children (WHO, 2010) by means of travel (Strong et al., 2005).
This is primarily because most of the GPS-recorded daily trips were
by car, even at distances where walking and cycling are feasible.
Furthermore, 63% of the car trips were at distances under 3 km,
one in three trips under 1.5 km, and one in six trips under 1 km.
Comparable results were found in Canada by Morency and
Demers (2010), where 33% of children trips under 1 km were
motorized.
The dominance of car-based travel is shown in Fig. 4.
In terms of walking, children travelled at distances up to 3 km,
with an average of 432 m and 7 min per trip (Table 3). On average,
boys were likely to walk and cycle longer distances (about 1 km
more per day or 0.5 km more per walking trip) and for more time
(10 min more per day or 4 more min per trip). This average value is
about half of the distance from home to the outer boundary of a
child’s local activity space reported by Loebach and Gilliland
(2016a) in London, Canada, which is 980 m. No significant differences 
were noted in relation to age.
Most of the walking trips occurred during the weekend (57%).
Whereas walking to school only accounted for 15% of trips, returning 
home accounted for 29% of walking trips. Outdoor activities
was the second highest purpose for walking trips (25%) as shown
in Fig. 5.
Given the small number of children in this dataset, tests comparing 
active travel behavior per day and child are not possible.
Instead, the comparison of the individual trips (Table 4) confirms
boys appear more active, walking longer than girls and at higher
speeds. This concurs with Klinker et al. (2014).

5.2. Local activity spaces (realized and potential)

As indicated in Section 4, the analysis was conducted in two
steps: 1) derivation of local activity spaces based on the GPS-identified 
trips; and 2) potential activity spaces. Various metrics
were tested: convex hulls, buffers, and confidence ellipses (CE).
Their analysis highlighted the benefits of CE, by providing not only
the extent of the area used by children in their daily travel, but also
the direction/orientation of their mobility.
Fig. 6 presents the variability of buffer area, convex hull and 95%
CE for the realized activity spaces as a function of the maximum
distance from home. As expected, the measures covary substantially, 
yet the CE is larger and displays non-linearities not captured
by the buffers approach.
The charts clearly display a clustering of points for distances
under 500 m, confirming that with very few exceptions, children
in this study did not walk or cycle outside of their immediate local
environment. As indicated, this is lower than the average distances
presented in Loebach and Gilliland (2016a) for children’s travel in
Canada.

Fig. 7 presents the areas of realized and potential local activity
spaces for the 23 children who had active trips starting or finishing
at home. The ratio between the realized and potential area is an
indicator of potential active mobility, which shows that none of
the children reached or exceeded the area that can be covered in
30 min by walking, with 17 children displaying ratios under 20%.
Consistent with previous findings, boys have potential activity
spaces twice as large as the girls (hence substantially larger capability 
sets) and are more likely to reach their potential activity
space (44%), compared to the girls (12%). Age has not contributed
in any significant or systematic way to the relative size of the activity 
spaces, nor parent restrictions, suggesting that although many
of the children have the freedom to walk in their neighborhood


5.3. Photo-collages

The photo-collages were analyzed according to the categories
outlined in Section 4.2. Table 5 illustrates a summary of the relative 
frequency of codes occurring in each of the three collages from

all children. Further disaggregated analysis comparing frequency
of codes was conducted between children with different levels of
independent mobility, gender, age, and high and low realized
activity spaces of 30 min walk.

Outdoor settings, particularly parks and open spaces, afforded
the highest number of functioning in the ‘Love’ and ‘Perfect’ collages. 
Affordances requiring physical activity included playing
organized sports, playing with friends, climbing trees and over play
equipment, however more passive activities such as resting, relaxing, 
and sitting on benches also featured. One child featured photographs 
of stones and trees, noting she liked to keep objects as
‘‘a memory of my trip”. Streets were also common settings and
afforded many positive functioning for children, including walking
to school, being with friends, playing in the cul-de-sac, and also
appreciating nature such as street trees, gardens and wildlife.
Streets were also referred to in children’s ‘Hate’ collages, but these
all related to lack of facilities (such as paths) and barriers to walking 
(including busy roads). One child’s ‘Hate’ collage contains a
photograph of a truck that is parked across the footpath. The annotation 
reads: ‘‘House getting built. Truck parked in the middle of the
footpath ”. References to cycling were not frequent but when
included, cycling was associated with streets outside children’s
homes, which appeared to be an important place valued by the

children for enabling play, activity and socializing. Relating to this,                        
the theme of proximity was relatively common in the children’s                                 
‘Love’ and ‘Perfect’ collages, with children indicating they would                             
like to live closer to parks and natural spaces.                                               
The photo-collages of boys and girls, children of different ages                           
and children with varying licences to be independent were compared 
yet did not reveal any substantial variation. A comparison                               
of photo-collages between children with high and low ratios of                                 
realized to potential local activity spaces while revealing similar                            

themes on positive functionings in the neighborhood, showed a
striking difference in that natural spaces and parks featured more
prominently in the photo-collages of children with high-realized
local activity spaces. Children with low-realized local activity
spaces tended to include photographs of their home environment
and more formal outdoor settings, like organized sports venues,
reflecting the tendency for children to lead more ‘‘bubble wrapped”
lifestyles and ‘‘backseat” modes of mobility (Karsten, 2005). Figs. 6
and 7 illustrate these differences (Figs. 8and 9).

There was a more noteworthy difference evident in the ‘Hate’
collages of children with high- and low-realized activity spaces.
Children with the lowest realized activity spaces made no references 
to street features that constrain activities such as walking,
cycling and playing. Furthermore, references to being driven were
only noted in the group of children with low-realized activity
spaces. Alternatively, aspects such as heavy traffic, unsafe crossings,
 lack of facilities and bullies were common amongst children
with high-realized activity spaces, suggesting that these children
were more aware of their neighborhood spaces. One child with a
high-realized local activity space noted: ‘‘This is the street I walk
down to get to the park. It would be nice if there was a path”. Accordingly, 
children with higher-realized activity spaces were more critical 
of barriers to walking and cycling in streets and actively sought
to propose ways their environments could change to support more
walking and activity in the neighborhood.


6. Discussion

This research adds to the body of knowledge with a new case
study and a novel methodology. We have employed activity spaces
and affordance as conceptual tools to explore what Fleuret and
Atkinson (2007) refer to as ‘spaces of capability’, or the place based
resources, functionings and capabilities relevant to children’s local
travel. As children’s active travel affords physical activity, play,
exploring and social engagement, the volume of walking and
cycling is of interest to understanding the role of local activity
spaces in shaping children’s wellbeing. In our case study, insight
into the children’s capability to achieve wellbeing is gained by

using potential activity spaces based on WHO standards.
Fig. 9. Example of a Perfect photo-collage from a child wi
Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94                                         
Our sample of children was not very active. Their trips were
short, including many driving trips that could have easily been
walked. This unsettling finding is also shown in other research.
For example, in Montreal. Morency and Demers (2010) found that
33% of all trips under 1 km (31.2% of all trips made by children 5–14 
years) were motorized. Only nine children were granted the
licences to walk TO and FROM school, cross the roads and ride a
bike on the main roads unaccompanied, which shows that even
in a green, safe, friendly neighborhood children are not ‘‘free
range”. This is consistent with the results obtained by Loebach
and Gilliland (2016a), who found that 95% of all the active time
spent within the activity space was within 400 m from home. Boys
seem to walk longer distances and have larger realized activity
spaces, confirming previous findings that gender is an important
conversion factor allowing children to expand the spatial range
of potential functionings associated with local travel (Klinker
et al., 2014); yet, this was still minimal compared to the potential
they could reach (25%). Only four children reached 50% of the

potential activity space that can be covered in 30 min by walking,
even with good access to recreational and shopping facilities
(about 9% of the suburb area), local parks (almost 9% of the area
within a 30 min walk of the school), and the river shore.
Despite the understanding that children can achieve physical
activity through other means, the limited functionings achieved
by the children through active travel is concerning, considering
the role active travel may contribute to children’s wellbeing and
the well documented consequences of sedentary lifestyle: prevalence 
of impaired metabolic health, cardio-respiratory fitness, obesity 
(Cooper et al., 2006; Roth et al., 2012) and lower cognitive
performance and mental and social development (Rissotto and
th low-realized local activity space (1.3% of the 30 min potential activity space).


Tonucci, 2002; Villanueva et al., 2012). These effects are especially
damaging for children (Nishimura et al., 2013), given their early
developmental stages. As already highlighted, reduced independent 
mobility associated with unrealized local activity space may
decrease children’s opportunities to learn about their neighborhood 
(Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002) and affect negatively their mood
compared to children who use more active travel (Westman et al.,
2016).

In our study, an evaluation of the capability sets derived from
children’s realized activity spaces provide little evidence that the
local neighborhood is currently utilized as a resource to enhance
children’s wellbeing through active and independent mobility.
However as Noah (2015, p. 463) suggests, a subjective understanding 
of activity spaces is important to enable ‘‘a more comprehensive
understanding of individuals’ and families’ neighborhood and activity
spaces”, and hence elucidate active travel heterogeneity and motivations 
within the same geographical space. The photo-collages
show how children evaluated their own neighborhood and provided 
a different and more optimistic picture of the potential for
local activity spaces to afford functionings associated with
enhanced wellbeing. Drawing on the capability approach, the local
neighborhood affords children a rich variety of positive functionings 
in line with a broader concept of wellbeing: socializing, being
active, playing organized sport, collecting objects and keepsakes,
and finding a private space. While the data from the photo-
collages was not during the same time period as the GPS data (in
order to avoid distortion to normal travel patterns), the children’s
interpretations of neighborhood indicated the high value placed on
parks, natural spaces and play spaces to achieve a range of functionings 
associated with wellbeing.

Children embodied the role of ‘environmental change agents’
(Malone, 2013), actively evaluating the potential functionings
afforded by their local activity spaces to see how their own and
other children’s wellbeing could be enhanced through more active
and independent travel. A critical stance was taken by some children 
noting the lack of pedestrian infrastructure, barriers to walking, 
the distance of places to their homes and the need to improve
the safety of crossings, indicating what Kyttä (2004) refers to as the
field of constrained action, or perceived functionings that children
can convert into achievable ‘doings’ and ‘beings’. However, children’s 
use of their potential local activity space is not entirely
shaped by the design of their neighborhood, but also by the
licences to be independently mobile granted by parents. Yet, even
when these licences to travel independently in the local neighborhood 
existed, few active and independent trips were recorded, suggesting 
other limiting factors for achieving independent and active
travel as a key functioning for children. The freedom to reason and
choose from various potential functionings is implicit within the
capability approach and this, in a sense, problematizes the notion
of a licence for independent mobility as a measure of children’s
wellbeing. Given that the photo-collages contained children’s evaluation 
of the constrained affordances associated with dangerous
road crossings, lack of infrastructure and other threats such as bullies 
and older children, it is also possible that some children in our
sample just decided not to make opportunities to travel
independently.

It has been well documented that studies using mixed methods
to capture objective and subjective data on children’s travel activity 
can be onerous and result in attrition in the sample size. This
was certainly our experience with this research. Therefore, a

trade-off is needed between the range of socio-behavioral and spatial 
data required and the representativeness of the resulting data.
The single case-study methodology and small sample do limit generalizations 
regarding children’s wellbeing in their local, mobility
environments. Furthermore, although a more holistic indication
of wellbeing was sought there were relevant activities that were
not captured. One issue is that although the low level of active travel 
is concerning, this represents only travel-related walking and
cycling, without including physical activity within the confines of
school or other planned sportive events (team sports, swimming,
etc.). However, the in-depth data collection and analysis provides
an important contribution to the knowledge of how local activity
spaces can provide for and inhibit children’s wellbeing. In this
respect, our approach of developing evidence of the factors shaping
children’s wellbeing using a capability approach or providing qualitative 
insights into activity spaces, represents a ‘proof of concept’
which may be further tested and applied in other contexts.

7. Conclusion

Children’s activity spaces involving active modes of travel continue 
to shrink worldwide, regardless of the opportunities of having 
activities within the proximity of home, which children could
explore. This paper reported on a case study in Perth, Western Australia,
 using a capability approach to explain some of the complexities 
of children’s wellbeing as it is shaped by their local
neighborhood activity spaces. While many of the children in the
case study seem to have more of the ‘‘indoor and backseat childhoods” 
(at least compared to previous generations), there is a positive 
outlook towards children’s healthy development through
children’s own evaluations of their local activity spaces. The findings 
indicate there is much potential for a capability framework
to build on existing studies that use geo-spatial tools (such as
activity spaces) and concepts such as affordances to develop a deeper 
understanding of how children’s independent and active travel
can lead to enhanced wellbeing. Furthermore, the capability
approach’s emphasis on potential and realized functionings and
the agency to select pathways to wellbeing, provide an opportunity
for new conceptualizations of children’s independent and active
travel and may suggest new approaches for planners and policy
makers to consider.

