
Walking to School: The Experience of Children in Inner City Los Angeles and Implications for Policy

Abstract
Neighborhoods walkability has become an important public health concern. The child’s-eye view of safe and walkable
environments is typically remiss from the literature. Particularly the experience of inner city kids, very different from that of
suburban neighborhoods, remains unreported. The study reported here offers new insights based on the walking to school
experience reported by the children of inner city neighborhoods of Los Angeles. Interviews with fifth-graders from five grade
schools suggest that the dangers in their social milieu are a much greater concern for them than the physical milieu, which
the walkability research typically emphasizes. The findings necessitate new policies.


The experience of growing up in cities—here and abroad—                             
and implications for planning and design of the built environment 
has been a focus of several well-known studies that                          
date back to the sixties and seventies (see Parr 1967;                               
Dyckman 1961; Carr and Lynch 1968; Lynch 1976; Ward                                  
1978; Chawla 2002). Most of these writings, some empirically
based, some speculative if not normative in tenet,                             
addressed the overall life experience of children in urban                           
space in a comparative context, emphasizing the possible                             
benefits of the city experience. Generally the focus of these                        
writings was on the influence of the urban experience on                             
cognitive and social development, as well as development of                          
personal agency, control, ingenuity, and wits. In their writings, 
Carr and Lynch (1968) and also Dyckman (1961) spoke                            
of the educative functions of the city. As the children are                          
allowed to explore the streets of their neighborhood and the                              
larger city, they are exposed to many different stimuli, diversity 
of people and activities, the variety of economic functions
and transport, community celebrations and rituals, as                          
well as a variety of sounds and smells that comprise the                             
many beguiling aspects of the quotidian life in the city.                            
Some of these writings reflected a nostalgia for the inner 				
city urbanism as prevalent in the multiethnic mixed use, and
also walkable urban settings of the earlier part of the last century. 
There is some indication that children growing up in                           
inner city tend to develop a higher level of street savvy and                        
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
personal agency, than in suburban environments (see Lynch                            
1976; Anich et al. 2011; Padrón and Ballet 2011). The urbanism 
of the inner city no doubt contributes to the higher level                       
of competency and capability in dealing with risks, dangers,                         
and uncertainties of city life. In his book The Child in the City                    
(1978), Colin Ward argues the city’s need for social 
                                
space—“the demand of the city’s children to be a part of the
city’s life”—in addition to providing a safe physical environment
for the young. What differentiates a child’s experience
of space is scale, their attention to details albeit mundane
from an adult perspective, their vivid and varied experiences
obtained from previous mental associations or memories,
and their perceptions shaped by more tactile instead of
visual qualities of the surrounding environment. Ward contends 
the need for a shared city—that is, a city for children
and adults alike—where the needs of the children have to be
designed and shaped not as separate areas but integrated for
their use anywhere and everywhere. He argues further that a
strategy to achieve this goal is to reduce automobile-oriented 
traffic and make the city more accessible and negotiable 
for the child to walk, bike, and play.
While emphasizing the social and cognitive developments 
and personal agency and competency, these studies
previously have not focused on the health benefits or the
safety and security aspects of walking in inner city urban
spaces. In recent years, the concern for safe and active school
travel has increased in practical and scholarly importance, as
encouraging children’s walking is seen essential from a

public health perspective. The rapid increase in childhood
obesity over the past two decades is a cause for serious concern 
about adverse health outcomes (i.e., hypertension, type
II diabetes, depression, etc.) and a consequent increase in
health care expenditure associated with childhood obesity. In
recognition of school travel as an important opportunity for
promoting daily physical activity among children, policymakers 
have put a special emphasis on promoting walking or
biking.
With growing dependence on motorized travel, children
now spend a considerable amount of their waking hours in
the backseat of automobiles driven to and from organized

activities even for a short distance. This trend is most evident
in children’s school travel. Whereas 48 percent of children
between the ages of five and fifteen walked or biked to
school in 1969—the time when Dyckman, Lynch and others
wrote about inner city urbanism—it has now decreased to
less than 16 percent (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
2003). Yet despite a considerable decrease in the rate of
walking, safety of child pedestrian remains a concern.
Pedestrian injuries remain the second-leading cause of unintentional 
injury-related death among children, disproportionately 
affecting ethnic minority children from low-income
families (National SAFE KIDS Campaign 2004). Particularly,
a substantial number of pedestrian fatalities and injuries
among school-aged children occurs during normal school
travel hours, making walking the second most dangerous
mode of travel after biking on a per mile basis (Transportation
Research Board 2002).
These safety concerns have led to several policy measures
at the federal and state levels. California was the first state in
the United States to implement a statewide Safe Route to
School (SR2S) program in 1999. A new federal program,
earmarked specifically for children’s safe and active school
travel, was established in 2005. This legislation promised to
provide $612 million to the state’s SR2S program over five
fiscal years, largely supporting physical improvement projects 
to date.1
Detractors of current interventions, however, argue that
public investments so far do not always reflect a sound understanding 
of factors that influence children’s travel generally,

and walking to school in particular (McDonald 2006;
McMillan 2005). The current state of knowledge on children’s
travel behavior is quite limited, and supportive policies for
improving walkability of urban space are primarily derived
from adult caregivers’ (usually parents’) attitudes and choices.
Children’s needs and perceptions are often subsumed by
parental concerns and preferences, and those in turn become
the proxy measures of children’s propensity to walk to school.
The essential premise of this paper is that children are active
agents in managing and negotiating their movement within the
context of opportunities and constraints offered by the proximate 
built environment. Although some of the earlier works
like the ones by Lynch (1976) and Chawla (2002) attempted to
understand how children perceived, used, and valued their
Journal of Planning Education and Research 34(2)
proximate environment, the recent literature on walking to
school are remiss of the child’s-eye view of safe and walkable
environment. The study reported in this paper addresses this
lacuna, and offers new insights based on ten walking to school
experience as reported by the children living in inner city Los
Angeles neighborhoods. The children who participated in this
study were all fifth-graders, from five grade schools—four
public and one parish—in the vicinity of the University of
Southern California (USC) campus and Exposition Park, considered 
a part of South Central Los Angeles.


Research Questions

Our research questions address some of these lacunae:

•• How do children perceive safety in their proximate
environment and the various appeals and barriers in
their experience of walking to school?
•• What are the relevant policy measures for the improvement 
of children’s propensity to walk by mitigating
actual and perceived risk?
•• What are the risk and modifying factors associated
with children’s current school travel at the individual,
household, and neighborhood level?

The existing research suggests that a set of nested, interconnected 
elements at individual, household, community,
and institutional/policy level collectively influences the propensity 
of children’s outdoor activities in general and walking
to school in particular. That is, environmental risk elements
involving both the built environment (traffic, land use, pollution,
etc.) and the social milieu (crime, drugs, gangs, etc.)
influence children’s as well as parents’ perception of risk,
which is then modified by household, community, and institutional 
supports (such as social programs and services).
What follows is a brief summary of children’s travel
behavior pertinent to walking and risks and modifying factors 
that are likely to influence the safety of child pedestrians
at individual, household, institutional, and community level.


Children’s Perception of Safety and Spatial Behavior

Children’s experience, perception, and behavior in geographical 
space have long been of interest to scholars from
several disciplines. Environmental psychologists have typically 
focused on the “lifeworlds” of children (see Aitken
1994; Matthews 1992). Studies suggest that this lifeworld is
negotiated between child, parents, and their environment
(Perez and Hart 1980). Moreover children’s spatial movement, 
or “license” (c.f. Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg
1990; Spilsbury 2005; Risotto and Tonucci 2002) to move
around independently is influenced by several attributes: age
and sex of the child (Hart 1979; Hillman and Adams 1992;
Matthews 1987); ethnicity and other sociocultural characteristics 
of the family (O’brien et al. 2000; Valentine 1997a);


parents’ (especially of mothers’) psychosocial milieu (i.e.,
sense of community, perceived safety or danger, social network,
 etc.) (Blakely 1993; Prezza et al. 2001; Valentine
1997b); and the characteristics of the proximate environment
(Kyttä 1997; Mattsson 2002; O’brien et al. 2000).
Some of this literature suggest that children are often
more competent in managing their own personal safety than
parents would normally believe. Furthermore, children often
actively engage in negotiating their parents’ understanding
of their environmental competence. (Valentine 1997b)


Propensity to Walk and Active Living

Although considerable knowledge has accumulated primarily 
from child pedestrian safety and accident prevention
studies (e.g., Christoffel et al. 1991; Mayr et al. 2003; Roberts
et al. 1995), very little is known about what would encourage
children to walk in the first place. The following presents a
brief review of walking behavior (not necessarily of children) 
from different disciplinary approaches.
The likelihood for individuals to walk has been empirically 
tested for different neighborhood types (Handy 1996;
Handy, Cao, and Mokhtarian 2006; Moudon et al. 1997;
Shriver 1997); land use pattern (Cervero and Duncan 2003;
Cervero and Kockelman 1996; Frank and Pivo 1994;
Greenwald and Boarnet 2001); street network, including
accessibility and connectivity (Cervero and Duncan 2003;
Cervero and Kockelman 1996; Krizek and Johnson 2006);
and pedestrian environment features (Alfonzo et al. 2008;
Rodriguez and Joo 2004). This literature provides evidence
of a correlation between various aspects of the built environment 
and adult walking trips. Children however are considered 
simply as trip generators who influence the amount of
household travel (especially of mothers) and range of travel
options (see McDonald 2005b).
Unlike urban and transportation planning studies that have
considered walking for the utilitarian purpose of transport,
health researchers traditionally have exclusively focused on a
different subset of physical activity—walking for recreation
(Sallis et al. 2004). Over the past decade, the field of physical
activity research has been evolving rapidly to widen their horizon 
by embracing the idea of “active living” that incorporates a
broader range of physically active behaviors (e.g., occupational
or utilitarian activities) and by expanding its focus beyond individual 
and cognitive domains (Sallis et al. 2006). In order to
incorporate various factors that may influence behavior, ecological 
models that encompass the role of individual, social,
environmental, and policy variables are of interest now (see,
e.g., Hoehner et al. 2003; King et al. 2002; Saelens et al. 2003;
Sallis et al. 2004; Spencer and Blades 2006).


Risk and Modifying Factors

Individual level: child characteristics. Safe travel behavior
requires an adequate level of cognitive and behavioral skills
125
such as recognizing risks, comprehending possible actions,
making appropriate decisions, and taking related actions
(Thomson et al. 1996). Accordingly, age becomes an important 
consideration in restrictions parents place on a child’s
travel activities (i.e., how far the child can go, whether he or
she can cross major roads, or ride a bicycle, etc.; Hillman,
Adams, and Whitelegg 1990). Parents, however, tend to
allow more independence to boys than girls of the same age,
which might partly explain a higher rate of pedestrian injuries 
and fatalities among boys (see National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration 2006).
Yet, the influence of a child’s gender on travel to school

seems mixed. A few studies suggest that more boys than girls
walk or bike to school (Evenson et al. 2003; McMillan et al.
2006; Timperio et al. 2006). Other studies report no significant 
gender differences in travel to school (McDonald 2005a;
Wen et al. 2008).

Household level: family characteristics. Along with financial
resources, availability of a household motor vehicle or the
number of drivers’ license holders seem to be positively correlated 
with auto trips to school (Bradshaw 1995; DiGuiseppi
et al. 1998; Ewing, Schroeer, and Greene 2004; Wen et al.
2008). In California, children from households with annual
income below $25,000 are nearly three times more likely to
walk or bike than those from households with annual income
above $75,000 (Surface Transportation Policy Project 2003).
In addition, studies suggest that parental or family support, 
especially maternal presence (Rosenbloom 1987;
Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008), parents’ attitudes toward
walking (Black, Collins, and Snell 2001; McMillan 2005),
their perceptions of neighborhood safety (Ahlport et al.
2008; DiGuiseppi et al. 1998; Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley
2004), and their own travel activities (McMillan et al. 2006),
are likely to determine how children travel to school and thus
their exposure to pedestrian injury risks.

Institutional level: school characteristics. Location of schools
and their accessibility is clearly the most notable barrier to
walking. Previous research has consistently found that distance 
(either actual or perceived) is most likely to influence
how children travel to and from school (e.g., Black, Collins,
and Snell 2001; Bradshaw 1995; Ewing, Schroeer, and
Greene 2004; Timperio et al. 2006). McDonald (2007) suggests 
that increasing travel distance alone may account for
half of the decline in walking to school between 1969 and
2001 in the United States.
It is apparent that school travel is also influenced by contemporary 
education reform strategies to redress unequal
educational opportunities. Parents now have more choices in
selecting appropriate schools, often bypassing neighborhood
schools. For example, one study found that children who

attended nonneighborhood schools traveled 4.5 times more
miles and as to be expected, were six times less likely to walk
to school than those attending neighborhood schools (Wilson,


Wilson, and Krizek 2007). The trend suggests a gradual
denouement of Clarence Perry’s (1929) classic neighborhood 
unit principles that, institutionalized by the American
Public Health Association (1948), became the basis for
school siting policy in the latter half of the last century.

Community level: neighborhood characteristics. The presence of
certain physical and social attributes in the neighborhood
may affect perception of safety, as suggested in the “broken
windows” syndrome (c.f., Wilson and Kelling 1982). Signs
of abuse and neglect in the built environment (i.e., graffiti,
litter, empty beer bottles, and boarded-up or abandoned
buildings or cars) and social incivilities (i.e., homelessness,
public drunkenness, gangs, drug-selling activities, tagging
graffiti) can be daunting, and thus limiting walking choices
and propensity (Day 2006; Loukaitou-Sideris 2006). Also,
obstructed views or limited visibility in the proximate environment, 
limited surveillance or absence of the “eyes on the
street” (c.f., Jacobs 1961), and lack of familiarity can cause
apprehension and thus deter walking (Kaplan, Kaplan, and
Ryan 1998).
Various studies have identified the risk factors for child
pedestrian injuries. These include streets with high traffic
volumes, posted speeds and number of parked cars, and
absence of play areas (Agran et al. 1996; Appleyard 1981;
Roberts et al. 1995). Although many parents drive their children 
to schools for safety reason, high traffic volume in the
vicinity of the school remains a threat (Collins and Kearns
2001). Absence or inadequate provision of pedestrian amenities 
such as sidewalks, crosswalks, and signalization can also
provoke a higher risk (Transportation Research Board 2002).
The literature suggests that the deterrents to walking to
school involve both the characteristics of the proximate built
environment and also certain traits of the social milieu that
define the neighborhood environment, as we have noted previously. 
Recent research on active living has produced a
number of built environment audit tools as recently reviewed
by Lewis (2010, 2011). But very little of that work provided
child-specific or elderly-specific audits: the two extremes of
age-contingent limits of competency (Uhm, Lewis, and

Banerjee 2011). The notion of “environmental press”—that
is, the degree to which the attributes of the environment can
impede or facilitate performance of activities for a given
level of competence—discussed by Lawton and Nahemow
(1973) suggests that the proximate environment needs to be
more user-friendly for population with developing or declining 
competencies. Our findings may contribute to development 
of a new generation of audit system designed for
children and elderly.


Methodology
Five elementary schools located in the historic University of
Southern California’s University Park campus surrounding
area were recruited to participate in the study conducted in
Journal of Planning Education and Research 34(2)
the spring of 2007. Figure 1 presents the study schools and
their attendance boundaries.
Located in low-income minority communities, just a few
miles south of downtown Los Angeles, the study schools
enrolled predominantly Hispanic students, ranging from 77
percent of student body (Foshay) to 97 percent (Norwood)
(see Figure 2). Most students in three public schools were
receiving free or reduced-price meals. The service areas (i.e.,
school attendance boundaries) range from 0.55 to 1.09 square
mile and their population densities range from 24.15 to 42.86
per acre, much denser than that of the City of Los Angeles
(13.10 persons per acres). Land use is mainly residential
ranging from 78 to 91 percent of the total land areas, except
in the Norwood neighborhood, where it is more mixed. All
of the study schools, except Weemes, are located along high
traffic arterials or close to freeways.2
In consultation with the school principals, a total of six
fifth-grade classrooms from the five study schools were
selected, comprising 176 child–parent pairs eligible for the
study.3 Written informed parental consent and the assent of
the children had to be obtained according to the IRB protocol
and a total of 104 children (59 percent participation rate)
agreed to participate. As to be expected, close to 90 percent
of the participating children were of Hispanic origin, overall
comprising more girls (54 percent) than boys (46 percent).
Consenting parents agreed to complete and return a survey
questionnaire. Eighty-seven parents returned the surveys (49
percent response rate). Table 1 summarizes demographic and
socioeconomic characteristics of the children by schools.
At the individual level, written, verbal, and visual recording 
methods provided different yet complementary information 
about children’s insight into school travel and
neighborhood environment. The protocol included a range of
hands-on methods developed to elicit children’s perspectives
of “lived” experience (see Greene and Hogan 2005 for
review): their perception of the neighborhood, values and
preferences about their proximate environment, their chosen
routes, and experience of travel to and from school.


Child-Centered Activities

The study required three classrooms sessions over a three-week 
period. In the first session all children in a classroom
received an introduction packet that included parent informed
consent form, child assent form, and parent questionnaire4
and child-friendly leaflets that explained the study and their
expected participation in different activities.
The second session began with collecting the signed consenting 
documents and completed parent questionnaires to
identify study participants. All children who agreed to participate
in the study with their parents’ consents received an
aerial photo of the school neighborhood with all the street
names clearly shown. Children were first asked to locate
their school and home on the map, and then to draw their
normal route(s) to and from school with a colored pen, using

arrows to indicate travel directions. A total of 143 school
travel routes (1.38 routes per child in average) were recorded,
irrespective of mode of travel. Children then were asked to
identify places that they liked, disliked, or felt unsafe on the
map to write brief comments explaining why. Children were

able to identify a total of 399 places (2.84 places per child in
average). Overall, places that children liked were most frequently 
mentioned (67 percent), followed by disliked (24
percent) and unsafe places (9 percent), in respective order.
The project team5 later visited and photographed the places
mentioned by the children.
In the third and last session, the children first completed
a survey questionnaire inquiring (1) their current travel mode
to and from school; (2) experience of school journey (i.e.,
encountered barriers); (3) perceptions of environmental risk
on way to and from school; and (4) preference for travel
mode to and from school.6 A total of hundred questionnaires
were completed.7 Finally photos of the places previously
identified by children were presented to the children with
their locations marked on the map. An evaluation form comprising 
a safe–unsafe binary scale was distributed to the

children to evaluate the photos based on either their experiences 
with the place or visual qualities of the scene, or both.


Built Environment Measures
Our audit of the built environment involved several measures: 
geographic information system database, hard-copy
maps, aerial photographs, and data collected from field visits. 
The school service areas were first divided into 0.25- ×
0.25-mile grid cells (or forty acres) and urban form measures
were collected from the cells that contained children’s self-reported 
school travel routes. In total, forty-three grid cells
were measured on four broad themes suggested to influence
walking: land use density and diversity, street pattern, pedestrian 
infrastructure, and traffic levels across the four school
neighborhoods. Of the attributes listed above, those with
areal measures, such as street area, were computed as a fraction 
of each grid cell. Other attributes such as crime density
was converted to per-acre measures by dividing the number
of incidents in the grid square divided by its area. The inventory 
also included streets with surveillance from Kid Watch


volunteers—local residents keeping an eye on the streets
typically traveled by children walking to school.8 Assessment
of selected pedestrian infrastructure and design elements
required field visits by the research team.

Findings

Mode of Travel
When asked about how they travel to school, 63 percent of
the children reported that they are driven to school either
alone or with other children. Approximately 32 percent of
the children indicated walking or biking to school most days.
As to be expected, a higher percentage of children walked or
biked (48 percent) coming home, while the car rides
decreased to 51 percent. This increased rate of walking home
suggests that working parents were unable to drive them
home midafternoon.

Travel Routes
The travel distance between home and school was measured
from the routes drawn by children on aerial-view maps.
Figure 3 summarizes the selected characteristics of the children’s 
travel routes. Typically they walked or biked much
farther than a quarter mile, normally considered appropriate
walking distance for grade school children. On average,


children walked nearly 0.48 miles for the trip to school and         
those who were driven traveled about 0.61 miles. For the trip        
from school, children (including those driven to school one          
way) walked a longer distance (0.54 miles).                          
The proportion of children walking or biking to school           
decreased with increasing distance (especially when greater          
than a half mile) (Table 2). Even of those who lived closer to       
school, a significant proportion—43 percent living within a          
quarter mile and more than 56 percent living within a quarter        
to a half mile—were driven to school. This trend was true for        
trips from school as well.                                           
inversely associated with children walking or biking for
this trip. The negative association between sidewalk main-Route 
Choices                                                        
Interestingly, children who walked to or from school often           
did not take the shortest route between home and school,            
contrary to what previous studies presumed (e.g., Timperio          
et al. 2006). Some routes were much longer than the shortest 
route in network distance (0.45 mile). Possible reasons          
are to avoid heavy traffic or unsafe area, to walk with              
friends on the way to or from school, to experience interesting 
walking environment, or simply distortions in their cognitive 
maps.                                                         
Children’s travel routes were further subjected to an audit      
of the proximate environment based on secondary data and                
field observation. Table 3 summarizes objective characteristics 
of the routes chosen, categorized by land use, street pattern, 
traffic environments, pedestrian-friendly features,            
appearance, and social milieu.                                       
Correlation analysis showed that none of the land                
use, urban form (street pattern), traffic environment, and

aesthetic variables (appearance, that is) was significantly
associated with a child’s school travel choice to or from
school. For the trip to school, only percentage street area
(rpb = –.21) (lower the percentage, the less traffic volume)
and crime density (rpb = –.22) (the lower the density the
safer) were inversely correlated with active commuting to
school.9 For the trip from school, the number of Kid Watch
sites was positively associated with active commuting from
school (rpb = .21), whereas well-maintained sidewalks (i.e.,
absence of broken surfaces, pot holes, cracks, obstructions,
etc.) (rpb = –.21) and crime density (rpb = –.32) were
tenance and walking from school is counterintuitive to a
general assumption that well-maintained sidewalk conditions 
can create a more amenable pedestrian environment
with comfort and safety. We believe that this counterintuitive 
finding may simply reflect a paradox in children’s
route choice influenced by their preference for safer, but
busier, streets where sidewalks may be less well maintained
or in a constant state of maintenance—curb cuts, utility
connections, street hardware repair, etc.—and avoiding
quiet and empty residential streets with well-maintained
sidewalks.
The density of crime along the child’s travel route was the
only factor found to be significantly inversely associated
with both walking to and from school, consistent with the
concerns raised by the Kid Watch10 volunteers from focus
group discussion and survey. The issues related to gangs and
drug activities, particularly during school commuting hours,
were most frequently mentioned          


Perception of Safety
About 54 percent of the children perceived walking as safe,
while 41 percent of them responded otherwise. As expected,
children who perceived walking as safe were more likely to
walk to and/or from school (Table 4). However, the perceived
safety of walking was found significantly related only
to current mode to school, <U+03C7>2(1, n = 95) = 5.20, p < .05.
Especially, girls appeared to be more influenced by safety
perception in walking than did boys. When controlling for
gender, significantly more girls who perceived walking as
safe walked to school (56 vs. 23 percent) than those who
perceived unsafe, <U+03C7>2(1, n = 53) = 5.84, p < .05.
When asked what made walking to or from school unsafe,
the children most frequently selected “fast-moving cars,”
followed by “many strangers” and other such social dangers
(Table 5). Deficits in the built environment ranked relatively
low compared to the concerns about the proximate social
milieu. The rankings of perceived risk were very similar
between the two groups, r s (16) = .76, p < .01.
When asked what would make walking to school safer or
more appealing, appearance of the proximate environment
seemed to matter most for these children. Thus, “cleaner
street” was most frequently selected (over 69 percent) followed 
by “no graffiti” and “less crime in my neighborhood”
(66 and 65 percent, respectively) (Table 6). Crossing the
street also ranked high, especially for the walkers who identified 
“safe places to cross the road” as the top concern.
Nevertheless, there was a high level of agreement between
the two groups of children regarding the rankings of perceived 
positive attributes supportive of walking to school, rs
(21) = .80. p < .01.


Neighborhood Environment and Walkability

Place-mapping activities captured children’s positive, negative, 
or safety related apprehensions. Each child identified
approximately four places on average; a total of 177 different
places were identified along (but not limited to) children’s
travel routes. Places that children identified as liked, disliked,
or dangerous were classified into six categories: residential 
area or street (including freeway, travel route,
intersection, alley and underpass); shops or restaurants; park
or recreational facilities; nonrecreational community facilities; 
home (including homes of friends or relatives); and
other (i.e., construction site, vacant lot, abandoned building,
parents’ workplace, etc.).

Places Liked

Children mentioned commercial establishments most often
as their favorite places (36 percent), including a variety of
stores and restaurants ranging from a small food market to a
large chain grocery store and a shopping center in the neighborhood.
This suggests that commercial establishments serve
as a cognitive anchor, more frequently selected than parks
and recreational facilities (14 percent) contrary to conventional wisdom.
However, children’s affinity for these places was closely
related to the perceived conviviality and the public life of
these places, offering opportunities for various physical,
social, and commercial activities (70 percent), and safety (22
percent). Children enjoyed the presence of other people and
chance to “bump into” friends. Also these places seemed to
provide children with a sense of security with the familiarity
with places and people, reminiscent of Jane Jacobs’s observations 
of about “eyes on the street” in sidewalks fronting
various commercial activities and the random social contact—the 
essence of public life. They also felt safe where
there was formal surveillance.


Places Children Disliked or Where Felt Unsafe
Residential areas/streets were consistently mentioned most
often as disliked (76 percent) or unsafe (74 percent) places,
followed by parks and recreational facilities (10 or 14 percent,
respectively). Why a place was disliked was associated
with safety issue (73 percent) and, to a lesser extent, with
sensory qualities such as noise, dirty street, and ugly houses
(22 percent). Table 7 summarizes the children’s risk perceptions 
categorized by the characteristics of places. Their
responses suggest that signs of social incivilities or social
dangers by far were of greater concern (86 percent) than perceived 
traffic dangers (8 percent).
Gang-related activities dominated personal safety concerns. 
Children were very much aware of places where gangs
frequently appeared or adorned with their territorial markers
like graffiti:

Unsafe because sometimes there’s gangsters drinking and
smoking and there is also tagging on the floor and the walls.

Children were very much aware of crime hot spots in the
neighborhood where violent crimes occurred or sometimes
they witnessed:

I don’t like Adams Street because there’s a lot of violence,
brutality, gangsters, drive-by, and murders.

I don’t like this place because there is gun shooting at night
and police cars.

I don’t like these places because I saw a dead body.

Often children were torn between opportunities some places
afforded and attendant safety concerns. They talked about
their daily struggles in some of the neighborhood parks

where their access and use was intimidated by the presence
of risk elements, ranging from dangerous objects to gang
activities:

[We] like because kids play (but) unsafe because many trash,
glass rocks, chips in sand.

I don’t feel safe on Toberman Park because there are a lot of
gangs.

They perceived streets as dangerous where fast-moving cars
often didn’t stop for pedestrians and the risk of being hit by
a car:
I dislike that place because the cars always go fast.
Sometimes cars don’t stop, and there might be an accident.
In their photo evaluation, safest places were all linked to their
social functions (i.e., school, church, library, grocery store, or
shopping mall). Freeway underpass and dark alleys were perceived 
the least safe, along with the places with barking dogs.


Place Dissonance: Setting Deprivation and                                      
Aggravation                                                                    
good city form (Lynch 1981). Children in inner city are
Group discussions with children further embellished their                      
views of the proximate environment that they valued or                         
preferred. A good fit between environmental settings and
users activities is an important performance characteristic of
likely to suffer from a higher level of “place dissonance,
which may limit opportunities for their participation in the


fullest range of activities (Banerjee and Baer 1984). Using          
the methodology used by Banerjee and Baer, children’s                
sense of place dissonance was seen of two types: “setting            
deprivation” or the absence of things (settings) that they               
would like to have in the neighborhood, and “setting aggravation” 
or the presence of things that children would want to        
get rid of.          
                                                
As shown in Table 8, elements that children wanted to            
have in their neighborhoods were relatively evenly distributed 
between the four categories: environmental items (such          
as streets, sidewalks, trees, open spaces, etc.), commercial         
facilities, social milieu, and community facilities. The things      
that children did not want to have in their neighborhoods,           
however, largely fell into environmental items (47 percent)          
and social milieu (40 percent).                                         

Summary and Conclusions                                              
In this study, we attempted to understand children’s experience 
of walking to school, and how their cognitive, enactive, 
and affective responses shape their experiences and            
preferences. In this study, inner city minority children demonstrated 
an acute awareness about community safety                  
issues. Particularly, they reported a high level of safety hazards 
in their neighborhoods and along their school travel            
routes, much of which are social in nature. Thus, the social             
milieu of their quotidian life mattered much more in shaping         
their walking experience than the quality of the built environment, 
which ironically, has dominated the focus of active         
living research. Yet it is apparent to us that policy efforts to     
promote walking to school thus should address children’s             
concerns about crime, drug, and gang-related issues, along           
with traffic. These children were quite forthright with their        
ideas about how to make their neighborhood safer and walking 
more enjoyable. Many of these ideas called for improvements 
in the built and social environments and in the                
community facilities, as also typically recommended by               
planners.                                                            
The purpose of and motivation for this research was to               
provide much needed information about children’s travel,             
particularly for safe walking trips, based on their                  

experiences, supplemented by their parents’ perceptions
(not reported here because of limitations of space).11 The
results from our analyses lead to several observations.
First, the trip to school and the trip from school are two
distinct events and influenced by parental perceptions and
mobility means. Overall, the trip to school was more a matter
of expediency and time, whereas the trip from school was
influenced by parents’ perceptions of their child’s competence,
preference, and social supports available in the neighborhood. 
This may be a result of attitudinal adjustment if
parents are not able to transport children to and from school.
While existing research generally view the school travel as a
single event, this finding suggests the need for strategies to
target each trip separately.
Second, children appear to walk longer than normally
assumed—quarter mile as the appropriate walking distance.
Furthermore, children may take more roundabout routes than
the shortest route between home and school, resulting in
much longer walks. Thus, the majority of research that
largely uses the distance as the crow flies or the shortest network 
distance as a proxy measure of travel distance may not
reflect children’s actual travel choice of routes and thus systematically 
underestimate the distance. This study demonstrated 
the use of aerial map as an effective tool in collecting
children’s actual school travel routes.
Third, parents’ perception of probable risks for their children 
does not appear to well reflect barriers that children
actually encountered as well as their perception of risks.
Parents’ view of their neighborhood tended to be more negative 
than their child’s perception, and they were generally
more concerned about traffic-related barriers compared to
children’s reports of actually encountering them en route to
school. Thus, while parents’ sense of safety may be increased
by such policy measures as completion of sidewalk network
or installment of additional traffic signal, as found in the
evaluation of SR2S projects (see Boarnet et al. 2005), it may
not necessarily enhance children’s sense of safety or
comfort.
Fourth, both barriers to and attractors of walking were
more closely related to children’s perception of the social
milieu of the proximate environment than traffic or other

environmental features, regardless of their current mode of                      
travel to and from school. Children had an acute sense of                        
place-based knowledge about the safety issues in their neighborhoods. 
They perceived some residential streets or areas as                    
most dangerous for the reasons mainly associated with gangrelated 
activities, drugs, crimes, shooting, or murder, occasionally 
witnessing such incidents. When given a chance,                         
children are more than capable of forming and expressing                         
their thoughts about the issues pertaining to the planning and                   
design of their everyday surroundings.                                           
In these neighborhoods, children being outside or walking                   
alone to or from school were viewed as a sign of parental                        
neglect and considered as placing children in unnecessary                        
danger. Children were constantly advised not to play in the                      
street at all. In turn, children liked commercial places most.                   
These places dominated children’s cognitive maps as strong                       
landmarks. In addition to the consumption opportunities,                            
children frequently expressed a sense of security by being in                    
the presence of informal and formal surveillance and for                         
opportunities for meeting people or bumping into friends.                        
Thus, busy commercial arterials with more traffic were perceived 
a safer walking environment than quiet and isolated,                      
albeit more aesthetic, residential streets without traffic.                     
Finally, planners or policymakers’ most typical responses                   
toward children’s environmental needs such as parks or playgrounds 
received significantly less favorable votes and less  

likely to be recognized as landmarks by children. Many children
 expressed frustrations with such child-designated places
as they were often threatened and felt unsafe by the presence
of social disorders, while they longed for play opportunities.
Any policy responses aimed to promote walking among children 
thus should be responsive to children’s concerns about
gangs, drugs, and crime as they pertain to how children experience 
and perceive their local environments in low-income
inner city areas. Clearly children’s perception of the unsafe
social milieu is in part derived from the appearance of the
built environment and the cues it transmitted—accumulation
of trash, preponderance of graffiti—the classic “broken windows” 
syndrome (see Wilson and Kelling 1982). Better
maintenance and clean up of the proximate environment
might help redress some of the concerns of the children, but
not just superficially one would hope.
The relatively small sample size in this research may
influence the level of significance in observed relationships.
Although the research did not se to test the proposed model
or to conduct a rigorous quantitative analysis, the sample
size did not allow to examine interactions among identified
elements and thus to understand their relative influence on
active school travel. By adopting a convenience sampling
strategy largely controlling for ethnicity and income within
limited inner city areas, the results from this study may lack
generalizability. However, the qualitative nature of this

research intends to reflect the diversity and depth of individual 
child’s perceptions and experiences. Future research
can add to the contribution of the current research by engaging 
children in other settings and contexts (nonurban, non-
ethnic minority, high income, etc.) that would make it
possible to examine differences or similarities.




