School travel mode choice and the characteristics of the urban built
environment: The case of Helsinki, Finland

abstract       
As observed in several previous studies, the nature of the urban structure can affect children's mode of
transportation to school. In this paper, we identify and investigate, in the Finnish context, the elements of
the urban structure around homes and en route to school that promote children's ability to walk or cycle
to school, using the conceptual domains proposed by Mitra (2013) to frame the work.
The associations discovered can, to a large extent however, be viewed as contrasting signi<U+FB01>cantly
with those identi<U+FB01>ed in previous research, as an increase in the variables, essentially indicating urbanity,
decreased the likelihood of the children walking or cycling to school. This is due to the existence of a
well-functioning public transportation network in the Helsinki region. The associations were more signi<U+FB01>cantly 
associated with the environment en route to school than with the environment around homes.
This research improves our understanding of active school transportation behaviour in an environment
that is already relatively supportive of active transportation and independent mobility by offering a well-functioning 
public transportation system.


1. Introduction                                                                             
											
Because of the growing obesity epidemic, the possibility that                          
different environments could promote greater physical activity in                           
children is a subject that has attracted increasing research interest                       
(Ding and Gebel, 2012; van Loon and Frank, 2011; Ding et al., 2011;                         
Pont et al. 2009). As such, activity on school journeys has become                          
the focus of an increasing research effort (see reviews by Stewart                          
et al., 2012; Stewart 2011; Wong et al., 2011; Davison et al., 2008;                        
Sirard and Slater, 2008), as the journey to school is something that                        
children need to cover on most days, and active school journeys                             
can thus promote a signi<U+FB01>cant opportunity for physical activity. To                   
better understand the linkages between the environment and                                  
children's active school transportation (AST), a number of conceptual 
frameworks have been proposed (McMillan, 2005; Panter                               
et al., 2008; Mitra, 2013; Sirard and Slater, 2008; Pont et al., 2011).                     
We discuss a few of these in more detail below and suggest a way                            
to empirically analyse the school journey travel mode choices of                            
children and young people living within 1–3 km of their school,                             
using the model proposed by Mitra (2013).                                                   
The earliest attempt to build a comprehensive child-speci<U+FB01>c                            
framework of the built environment's impact on transport was                                
												
provided by McMillan (2005). In her framework the urban form
was seen as having an indirect link to children's active transport,
through the prism of parental perception and decision-making.
The urban form clearly had an effect on parental perceptions of the
neighbourhood through which the children had to travel and on
parents' perceptions of traf<U+FB01>c safety as well as on the transport
options available to the household. Based on their perceptions,
parents then decided whether their children could walk or cycle to
school. Panter et al. (2008), however, were subsequently to criticise 
McMillan's framework for not incorporating the varied components 
of the environment that had been shown to in<U+FB02>uence
 parental decision making. In its place they suggested a conceptual
 framework composed of four domains of in<U+FB02>uence on children's
active travel behaviour. These domains were the individual factors
concerning the child, the physical environment, external factors
(such as climate or policy), and the main moderating factors (age,
gender, and distance). In this context, the diverse elements of the
urban form were highlighted, focusing on relevant issues in relation 
to the creation of perceptions among both children and parents 
and their joint decision making processes, such as facilities,
environmental factors related to personal and traf<U+FB01>c safety, and
route directness etc.
A further conceptual framework has been suggested by Mitra
(2013). His critique of the framework proposed by Panter et al. is 
that the framework is not clear in explaining the behavioural

processes that link the factors on these different levels of the
ecological model to the choice of active transport modes. Trying to
overcome this shortcoming, Mitra's framework is informed by
research from three different research <U+FB01>elds and multiple theoretical 
backgrounds where children's transportation has been in
focus, namely, in transportation and urban planning studies, public
health, and environmental psychology. Based on his review, Mitra
builds a behavioural model of school transport (BMST) that is at its
core a socio-ecological model, which looks at the associations
between built environment and behaviour across multiple nested
layers. In addition, the model also contextualises the intrahousehold 
interactions within the household activity-travel framework, 
and considers the perceived importance of an escorted
trip, the mobility options available and the activity constraints on
the family.
On the urban environment level, Mitra (2013) identi<U+FB01>es <U+FB01>ve
conceptual domains of relationship between the neighbourhood
environment and school travel outcomes. These domains include
the proximity to school, traf<U+FB01>c and personal safety concerns,
connectivity, comfort and attractiveness, and the possibility to
maintain social capital on the school journey. Previously discovered 
evidence in respect of the environmental attributes associated 
with children's transport choices is then placed under
these conceptual domains and discussed in detail by Mitra.
Of the frameworks described above, we <U+FB01>nd Mitra's (2013)
framework the most thorough in its reasoning and portrayal of the
hypothesised links between urban environment and transport
options in respect of children's journeys to school. In this paper,
we seek to highlight the elements of the urban structure that
promote children's transport to school by foot or by bike, using the
conceptual domains proposed by Mitra to frame the work. We also
ask whether the correlates of walking and cycling differ. It has
been suggested that the correlates for walking and cycling in
terms of school journeys may be different (Kemperman and Timmermans, 
2014; De Vries et al., 2010) and hence we treat walking
and cycling to school as two distinct outcome variables rather than
looking at active versus passive travel modes.
Somewhat unusually, we only include subjects living within
distances between one and three kilometres from their school.
Increasing distance has consistently been shown to decrease the
propensity of journeys taken actively (e.g. Su et al., 2013; Pont
et al., 2009; Yeung et al., 2008). In the pupils studied from the
Helsinki region, inactive modes of transport were almost non-existent 
(2.8% modal share) on journeys shorter than one kilometre, 
while previous research shows notably lower shares of
active transport in students living close to school. In the US, the
share of walking was 48% for those living within 1 mile of their
school (McDonald, 2008); while another study reported 32%
walking, 14% cycling, and 54% using car or bus as their primary
transport mode within the same distance (Schlossberg et al.,
2006). In Australia, 23% of students living within 0.75 km of their
school had no active commuting trips in a week (Merom et al.,
2006). Meanwhile, a Dutch study found the share of inactive trips
within 1 km of school to be 10% (Aarts et al., 2012). With regression 
analysis, the point is to explain the variance in the outcome
variable (i.e. using inactive modes vs. walking or cycling) by the
variance of the independent variables (i.e. the structure of the built
environment). To be able to explain the variance in school journey
transport modes, we need to concentrate on those trips where it is
not only distance but also the environment that affects the mode
chosen.
This article is, we believe, the <U+FB01>rst to operationalise Mitra's
framework. We use, where available, variables related to the urban
environment already utilised in earlier research and create new
ways of operationalising the domains that have not previously
been studied in detail. In their framework, Panter et al. (2008)

recommended that the built environment relating to the neighbourhood, 
destination, and route environment should be considered. 
Research that has empirically studied the destination (i.e.
school) environment and facilities has however shown no signi<U+FB01>cant 
associations with children's active travel behaviour (Panter 
et al., 2010; Mitra et al., 2010). Thus we concentrate instead on
analysing the urban environments of homes and school journeys
in correlation with the transport modes of children and young
people and leave the destination environment out of our analysis.
Finally, this study adds to the discussion on the associations
between the built environment and AST by exploring this general
theme in the Finnish context. Thus far, this <U+FB01>eld of research has
largely been dominated by research from the US, Canada, Australia
and the UK with occasional examples from other European
countries such as Netherlands (e.g. Aarts et al., 2012; Kemperman
and Timmermans, 2014).


2. Material and methods

Recent developments in GIS (Geographic Information Systems)
and especially in public participation GIS (PPGIS) have created new
opportunities for the use of location-based methodologies. The
softGIS methodology is one example of a PPGIS method that enables 
the collection of large datasets of residents' experiential
knowledge concerning various environments (Kyttä and Kahila,
2011). The main bene<U+FB01>t of utilising location-based surveys in data
collection concerning daily mobility and environmental experiences 
is the geographical dimension the data maintains. Based on
the coordinates, the experiential knowledge gathered from residents 
can be simultaneously analysed with register-based GIS
data, which provides new, location-based research possibilities
(Kahila and Kyttä, 2009).
The data relating to this study was collected via a softGIS survey 
for children, where the respondents used the Internet interface 
to mark their home and daily routes to school, and to answer
questionnaires concerning school journeys, perceived health and
wellbeing as well as background details. The method has been
tested in previous research among both children (Kyttä et al.,
2012; Broberg et al., 2013) and adults. The user interface included
a set of questionnaire pages where conventional survey question
and mapping pages alternated (see Fig. 1)1. Additionally, the respondents 
were asked to mark places that were functionally,
emotionally or socially meaningful, and to describe how accessible
these places were, in terms of independent mobility and active
transport. This article concentrates on children's school journeys,
while the data relating to meaningful places will be reported
elsewhere.


2.1. Subjects and communities

This article studies the school journeys of two select age groups
in a small but rapidly growing metropolitan area, the capital region 
of Finland. The research data was collected in 16 comprehensive 
schools (in total 22 5th grade classes and 38 8th grade
classes) during the autumn and early winter of 2011. The schools
and their surrounding residential areas included represent different urban structures ranging from the inner city urban core to
surrounding suburbs, and fringe areas dominated by single-family
housing.


In Finland, every pupil is assigned to the nearest school, or the               
nearest school where the chosen <U+FB01>rst foreign language is being                      
taught. Pupils are also free to choose other schools, but going to                  
the nearest school available is still fairly common: 70% of the                     
primary school pupils go to their nearest school, the respective                    
<U+FB01>gure for lower secondary schools being 60% (Bernelius, 2011).                     
In the Helsinki region, the school network is still relatively                  
dense, though smaller schools have been closed and education                        
centralised into bigger units. The density of the network is visible                
in the relatively short school trips of the studied pupils (mean                        
1.8 km, SD 2.2 km, and maximum 14.2 km). Finnish law requires                       
the municipalities to grant free school transportation for pupils                   
whose school journey to the nearest designated school is over                       
5 km. The municipalities of Espoo and Vantaa offer a free public                    
transportation ticket that is valid on school days for these pupils.                
Helsinki city offers these tickets, but the journey length limits are               
2 km for 5th-graders and 3 km for 8th-graders.
Data collection was organised in computer equipped classrooms 
and led by a research assistant. The ethics board from the
Education Board of the Cities of Helsinki and Vantaa approved the                   
research, and informed consent was gathered from the respondents 
and their parents. The total number of pupils in the                      
classes that participated in the study was 980, although 80 pupils                  
were absent for various reasons. In some schools problems were                      
encountered with the Internet connection, but in these cases the                    
pupils were instructed to <U+FB01>ll in the questionnaire at home. After                   
incomplete answers were excluded, the <U+FB01>nal dataset included the                     
answers of 828 pupils, of whom 35% were from the 5th grade                          
(approximately 11 years old), and 65% from 8th grade (approximately 
14 years old).                                                               
In this article, only a subsample of these 828 respondents is                   
included. Based on the transport mode shares of the respondents                     
in different distance bands from schools (see Table 1), we narrowed our 
<U+FB01>nal dataset down to children who lived between one                       
and three kilometres from school. Nelson et al. (2008) have suggested 
applying a 2.5-mile criterion within which active commuting 
to school is achievable, while others have used 2 mile cut-off 
based on the low levels of AST beyond that limit (McDonald,                     
2008; Mitra and Buliung, 2014). Including only children living in                   
the range 1–3 km from school thus allows for variance in the                        
transport modes chosen and makes modelling the correlates of the                    
environment meaningful.                                                             
In all, 224 children lived within the speci<U+FB01>ed range, and 202 of                
them provided their actual school journey taken. These 202 children 
will constitute the <U+FB01>nal subjects of this article. Of these                       
In modelling, transport mode was recoded as (1) walking, (2) cycling,
children, 18.3% were 5th graders, while for the data as a whole the                 
                                                    
percentage was 35.4. This is due to the secondary school network
being sparser and thus producing longer school journeys for the
older age group. The school trip distances were fairly similar
throughout the study region, although longer distances were a
little more prominent in the more sparsely populated fringe areas.
Nevertheless, the children selected for the study represent the 16
schools where the initial dataset was gathered. The percentages
for girls were 53.7% and 51.8%, respectively, and regarding gende
the modelling dataset is representative.
Subjects typically lived with both parents (72.6%), had their
own room (86.1%), a bicycle (96.5%), and spoke Finnish at home
(93.5%). Of the families of the respondents 43.1% lived in single
family housing, while the proportions living in apartment buildings 
or semi-detached houses were roughly the same. Owning two
or more cars was typical (55.4%), with only 6.9% of the families not
having a car.

2.2. Measures

2.2.1. Outcome variable

The mode of school travel was studied by asking how the respondent 
had most often travelled to and from school during the
current week: on foot, by bicycle, by public transportation, by
school bus or taxi, by car, or other mode. There was little difference
between the transport modes to and from school, and as it has
been shown that the urban environment plays a more signi<U+FB01>cant
role on journeys to school than from school (Mitra et al., 2010), the
stated mode on the journey to school was used in the analysis.
Walking (17%), cycling (43%), and public transport (34%) were the
main modes in the <U+FB01>nal sample, while private car was used on the
remaining 6% of the trips2. There were no signi<U+FB01>cant differences in
modal shares between genders or age groups.
The level of independence in respect of mobility in relation to
school journeys was studied by asking with whom the respondent
normally travels to school: alone, with other children, or with
adults. Journeys were predominantly taken with other children
(53%) or alone (47%), with only one respondent reporting that they
travelled with an adult. There was a slight difference between age
groups in terms of the proportions of trips taken alone and with
other children, but these differences were not statistically signi<U+FB01>cant. 
The studied children enjoyed high levels of independence
in their mobility relating to school journeys, and thus this variable
was not used as an outcome variable, as suggested by Mitra (2013),

but as an independent variable operationalising the conceptual
domain of maintaining social capital3.


2.2.2. Physical environmental variables
GIS-based measures t of the built environment were calculated

for 500 m buffers around each respondent's home (Kyttä et al.,

2012) and within 100 m of the drawn school journeys (Panter
et al., 2010). Detailed descriptions of the variables and their

summary statistics are provided in Table 1.


2.2.2.1. Proximity-related variables. The distance, as the crow <U+FB02>ies
(DIST_CROW), from home to school was calculated and used in

adjusted models4. Rather than treating distance as a measure of
environment in itself, we included it in the partly adjusted models,
for densities of different measured urban structures and distance

are closely interlinked. Wong et al. (2011) have outlined how
distance can be viewed as an operational measure of the concept
of ‘density’.


2.2.2.2. Variables related to traf<U+FB01>c safety and personal safety.


Numerous variables concerning the traf<U+FB01>c environment have been
used in previous research on children's transportation. In this
study, streetlight density (Panter et al., 2010) and proportion of


intersections with street lights were used (Mitra and Buliung,
2012).
The presence of primary roads was operationalised as their
proportion of total roads (Panter et al., 2010) and as the length of


major roads by area near home and along school journey (Mitra
and Buliung, 2012). We also analysed whether or not a major road
or railroad intersects the school journey (Schlossberg et al., 2006).
Mitra (2013) hypothesizes that large retail centres or employment 
districts may discourage AST. Previous research in relation to

Helsinki has shown that environments dominated by high building 
densities discourage active and independent mobility (Broberg


et al., 2013). Building density was calculated as the summed <U+FB02>oor
space in all the buildings within a buffer divided by the area (Lin
and Yu, 2011). The proportion of land covered by public buildings
near home (Su et al. 2013) was also calculated.


It has been suggested (Mitra, 2013; Ding et al., 2011) that a
mixed design and associated presence of street-level retail and
‘eyes on the street’ could encourage AST. We calculated the mix in
the main uses of buildings (as de<U+FB01>ned for land use mix by Frank
et al., 2004).

2.2.2.3. Connectivity-related variables. Previous research highlights
the existence of contrasting evidence in relation to the associations 
between pedestrian connectivity or intersection densities
and children's active transportation (e.g. Wong et al., 2011).
Nevertheless, we calculated the ratio of 4-way intersections to
total number of street intersections (Mitra and Buliung, 2012). Two
variables concerning the overall availability of roads to walk or
cycle and the connectivity of these roads were calculated. Road
density (Panter et al., 2010) and intersection density (Schlossberg
et al., 2006) were calculated for both home and route
environments.5
Connectivity relates not only to the transport network, but also
to the functional connectivity of the urban environment. We
analysed the availability of public transportation by calculating the

number of transportation stops in proximity to home and along

the school journey.


2.2.2.4. Variables related to comfort and attractiveness. The presence 
of open space or parks (Ding et al., 2011; Mitra, 2013) and

smaller neighbourhood blocks (Mitra, 2013) could enhance the

comfort of walking and cycling. The greenness of the environment

was analysed as the proportion of parks and recreation areas as

well as that of forests near home and along the route. The presence
of small neighbourhood blocks was operationalised as the proportion 
of land covered by single family housing.
Sidewalks are nearly omnipresent in the Helsinki area and are,
probably for this reason, not included in any of the geographical
datasets available. In reality, there is little to be gained from analysing 
sidewalks in relation to mobility statistically, as there would
be no variance between subjects. Nevertheless, taking into consideration 
the notion of comfort in respect of pedestrian and bicycle 
mobility, we analysed the summed length of separate walk
or bikeways along the school journey divided by route length.

2.2.2.5. Variables related to maintaining social capital. As Mitra
(2013) notes, little research has been done on the connections
between the social environment and AST. Thus, in order to analyse
the possibility of meeting others on the school journey, we included
variables concerning population size and residential densities 
near home and along the route of the school journey. Increasing 
population density has also been hypothesized as having
a positive association with transport-related physical activity
(Ding et al., 2011).
Moreover, accompaniment on the school journey SJ_WITH_-FRIENDS 
(as described above) was used as an independent variable 
operationalising the conceptual domain of maintaining social
capital.



2.2.2.6. Variables related to household and child. Household access
to private automobiles was interrogated by asking if the respondent's 
family owned one, two or more cars, or no car at all
(OWN_CAR). Car-ownership was included in all the partially adjusted 
regressions.

Parents' general attitude towards their child's mobility options

can be seen in the mobility licences, i.e. permission to move
around independently granted to the child. Children granted a

                                            
greater level of independence were more likely walk or bike to
school in an Australian study (Merom et al., 2006). We operationalised 
the licences with a set of questions concerning those
things the child is allowed to do independently (Hillman et al.,
1990), revising some of the items to better re<U+FB02>ect the Finnish
context. The children answered whether they were allowed to do a
list of seven things alone (MOB_LICENCE_COUNT): go to leisure
activities, go to parks or sports facilities, use public transportation,
ride their bike, be outside after dark, go to the city centre or
shopping malls, and walk or ride to their friends' places.
Finally, age group and gender were included in all the models,
as they have been shown to be closely associated with both independence 
and the mode choice of children's travel (see e.g.
Mitra et al., 2014; Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Johansson et al., 2010).

2.3. Analysis

The environmental variables were extracted from register-based 
geographical datasets using ESRI ArcMap 10.1 and MapInfo
Professional 11.5. The main geoprocessing techniques used were
buffering the homes and the school journeys, overlaying and intersecting 
different layers of analysis with each other, and calculating 
statistics concerning the individual buffers from these intersections 
as well as the building points within buffers. Different
raster calculation and focal statistical methods were used to calculate 
variables concerning land use.
Three geographical datasets were used in the analysis. The land
use –related variables were calculated from the SLICES dataset6.
Population and building density-related variables were drawn
from a building centroid dataset7, and the Digiroad8 dataset was
used to build the traf<U+FB01>c-related variables.
The statistical analyses were performed with IBM SPSS Statistics 21. 
The signi<U+FB01>cances in the differences of means between
genders and age groups were studied with T-tests and the differences 
of frequencies across groups with the chi-squared test. The
connections between the urban environment and the transport
mode were studied with multinomial regression analysis. Multi-nomial 
outcomes were speci<U+FB01>ed in the models with a three category 
outcome of walking, cycling, or motorised travel (used as
the reference category).
A set of partially adjusted regressions (all adjusted for the
confounding effects of age, gender, household car-ownership, and
distance from home to school) were run to <U+FB01>lter the initial set of
variables down to those that showed correlation with the transport 
mode choice on a con<U+FB01>dence level of 95% (p o0.05). Another
set of multivariate fully adjusted regressions were estimated separately 
for the environment surrounding the home and school
journey. When variables showed strong correlations (r 40.75),
these were entered into the multivariate fully adjusted model one
at a time and only the variable that was most strongly associated

with the transport mode choice was included in the <U+FB01>nal model.
(see also Mitra, Buliung 2012; Panter et al. 2010).


3. Results

3.1. Partially adjusted models of transport mode choice on school
journeys

Table 2 presents the direction and signi<U+FB01>cance of associations
from the partially adjusted models for walking and cycling on the
school journey. Of the variables concerning traf<U+FB01>c and personal
safety, most were in signi<U+FB01>cant association with the transport
mode choice. Increasing street light densities as well as increasing
proportions of intersections with street lights decreased the
probability of choosing active transport modes rather than taking
the bus or being driven in a car. These associations were in contrast 
to the hypothesised increased feelings of safety and consequential 
increase in walking or cycling. Targeting further the
issue of traf<U+FB01>c safety, the density of major roads on the school
journey was signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with walking and cycling: the


increasing density decreased the propensity of AST. The variables
used to study personal safety were partly in expected association
and partly in unexpected association with the transport mode.
Increasing building densities in the school journey and home environment 
decreased the propensity to walk or cycle. The higher
the prevalence of public buildings in the home environment, the
less likely the respondent was to walk and cycle. The increasing
mix in building uses in both the home and school journey environment 
decreased the probability of choosing one of the active
transport modes.
The variables related to connectivity showed signi<U+FB01>cant association 
with transport mode choice in particular with road and
intersection densities along the school journey route. Moreover,
the proportion of four-way intersections, as a percentage of all
intersections, was in signi<U+FB01>cant inverse association with activity
on the school journey. Each of these associations supports the
view that a denser environment decreases the probability that an
active mode will be chosen. Not surprisingly, the density of public
transport options around the home and school journey decreased
the probability of walking or cycling.
Comfort and attractiveness were studied with a set of variables
concerning land uses in the home and school journey environment

and the availability of separate walk or bikeways. The proportion
of forests in the environment was not associated with the transport 
mode choice, but the more recreation areas there were
around the home or school journey, the less likely the respondents

were to walk or cycle. This <U+FB01>nding contrasts with the supposed
association. The increasing proportion of land covered by single-
family housing increased the likelihood of walking and cycling to
school signi<U+FB01>cantly, as was hypothesised. Then again, the availability 
of separate routes for walking and cycling was not associated 
with choosing these modes of transport.
Finally, concerning the conceptual domain of maintaining social 
capital, the urban environmental variables showed signi<U+FB01>cant
associations with the choice of cycling to school. Increasing population 
and housing densities in both the school journey and

home environments decreased the likelihood of cycling. The associations 
with walking were weaker, but still signi<U+FB01>cant at
po 0.05 level. Making the school journey in the company of

friends was not associated with the mode choice.

In general, all the associations studied, apart from the proportion 
of single family housing around the home environment,

showed a similar tendency: the denser the measured variable, the

less likely the respondent was to walk or cycle. This has to do with
the respondents choosing between active transport modes and
using public transportation rather than being driven in a car.

In addition, the associations between the variables describing


the school journey environment had more signi<U+FB01>cant associations
with the mode choice than with the same variables describing the

home environment. We suggest that this is so because the school

journey environment depicts rather closely the environment that
might have some effect on the mode choice, whereas the environment 
surrounding the respondent's home potentially gives

too generalised a de<U+FB01>nition of the environment to matter.

3.2. Fully adjusted models for the home and school journey

environment


After investigating the initial associations between the variables 
selected to depict the conceptual domains of Mitra's model,
we ran fully adjusted models separately for the home and school
journey environments. These are presented in Table 3.
In the <U+FB01>nal model concerning the home environment, signi<U+FB01>cant 
associations persisted for the domains of proximity and
at personal safety. The longer the distance between home and school,
the less likely children and young people were to walk or cycle to



school. Interestingly only the density of the built environment was
signi<U+FB01>cant in the <U+FB01>nal model in spite of the large number of potential 
variables related to the urban environment. Increasing
building density around the home decreased the likelihood of
walking and cycling. In addition, the speci<U+FB01>c qualities of each
child, namely, its gender and age, were closely associated with
cycling in particular.
The <U+FB01>nal model for the school journey environment showed
more signi<U+FB01>cant associations, for proximity, traf<U+FB01>c safety, and
connectivity-related variables. Longer distances between home
and school decreased the likelihood of choosing active transport
modes. The effect of growing distance does not seem very signi<U+FB01>cant 
based on the odds ratios, but it must be noted that only
the respondents with distances from one to three kilometres were
included, and thus an increase of one unit (km) cannot produce
very large odds ratios.
As expected, the greater the incidence of major roads near the
route, the less likely the respondents were to cycle to school. The

association with walking to school here was not however signi<U+FB01>cant. 
Intersection density was signi<U+FB01>cant for the model in
general, but could not differentiate between the active transport
modes. The odds ratio for the variable concerning the density of
public transportation stops along the school journey was 0.659 in
relation to cycling, which implies that for each unit increase in the
number of bus stops per kilometre of the route, the odds that
cycling was the mode chosen decreased by 34%.
Gender and age group were associated with cycling. The
younger age group was 12 times more likely to cycle to school
compared to the older one, and boys more likely to cycle than girls.
Also car-ownership in respect of the household was signi<U+FB01>cantly
associated with the transport mode. Interestingly, the more cars
there were in the family, the more likely the respondents were to
cycle or walk to school.
The fully adjusted model for the school journey environment
predicted the transport mode choice correctly in 72% of cases. It
succeeded particularly well in predicting cycling and non-active
travel behaviour, whereas walking was less likely to be predicted
correctly. The fully adjusted model for the home environment was
less successful in making the correct predictions (62%), but notwithstanding 
this, the model's prediction rate was better than the
proportional by chance accuracy rate of 35%, speci<U+FB01>ed for the data
at hand.

In Fig. 2, the environmental variables signi<U+FB01>cant in the fully
adjusted models are depicted on a series of maps. The <U+FB01>rst map

shows the transport modes and the actual school journeys drawn
by the respondents as well as the building densities in their home
environments. The three remaining maps depict the urban characteristics of the school journey environment that were associated
with walking and cycling. The lowest rates of walking and cycling


to school can be seen in Helsinki city centre and the surrounding
urban core areas (the south-eastern part of the region) as well as
in the area where the main north-bound motorway and the ring
road meet (central north area on the map). These areas and the
pattern between transportation modes and the environmental
variables is clearly visible on the map depicting the major road
densities around school journeys, but also the other maps illustrate 
similar patterning.


4. Discussion and conclusions

In this article, we studied the ways in which the surrounding
environment could impact or promote different types of physical
activity on school journeys, using the conceptual model proposed
by Mitra (2013). Of the domains proposed in the model, proximity,
connectivity and traf<U+FB01>c safety seemed to be the most relevant in
the Finnish context. The associations were more signi<U+FB01>cant when
the environment of the school journey was studied than in the
case of the home environment. Interestingly, many of the associations 
present in the partially adjusted models were in contrast
to what had been suggested in the context of previous research.

As such, the question thus arises, can the results presented in

this article be compared to those generated previously, particularly

when we have dropped those subjects living closest to school and

those using predominantly active modes from our analysis. While

not presented in this article, we also ran the partially adjusted

multinomial regressions for all the respondents living within 3 km

of their school. These analyses showed no change in the directions

of the associations but substantially fewer signi<U+FB01>cant associations.

This is understandable, for within 1 km of the school, nearly all the

subjects walked or cycled, and hence we would not expect to <U+FB01>nd

an association between the different environmental factors based

on those few who had opted for inactive modes.

In their review, Ding et al. (2011) found residential density and
land-use mix to be consistently associated with transport physical
activity among both children and young people. Our <U+FB01>ndings
however contrasted somewhat with this general conclusion:
where increasing residential density and building use mix decreased 
the likelihood of engaging in AST. Subsequent to the carrying 
out of our own research, others have found a greater land
use mix to be negatively associated with children's walking to
school. Su et al., (2013) suggest this might be due to the diverse
landscape resulting in more people on the streets and a more
disorganised built environment. It is, moreover, possible that the
uses selected for the analysis are simply not relevant in respect of
children's mobility; and that rather than looking at residential,
commercial, of<U+FB01>ce and institutional land uses, an even mix of
which has been shown to promote activity in the adult population,
we should instead examine other types of land use. This is further
emphasised through the notion that dense built environments,
often associated with commercial, institutional and of<U+FB01>ce land
uses, decreased the likelihood of walking and cycling in this study.
All the partially adjusted models with signi<U+FB01>cant associations
to the transport mode showed associations in the same direction,
the increase in the variables decreasing the likelihood of walking
or cycling being chosen. The only exception was the proportion of
single family housing. We reason that actually all of the physical
environmental variables used measure at some level the same


thing, urbanity, which in the Helsinki region comes with a well-functioning 
public transportation network. While the proportion                
of single housing is associated with smaller blocks and thus possibly 
a more agreeable walking and cycling environment, the                           
public transport options available are also fewer in number. In                 
addition, the share of longer distance school journeys was slightly                       
larger in the more remote areas of the study regions, but not-withstanding 
this engagement in active transport is more common. 
Thus it seems that public transportation options are the key                 
to understanding the mode choices of the students. To further this                    
reasoning, our <U+FB01>nding about more cars in the household promoting 
a greater number of school journeys by cycling contrasts                         
signi<U+FB01>cantly with the conclusions of previous research and what it                   
says in general about the mobility options of the household and                         
the actual mobility. This again may simply be a re<U+FB02>ection of the                       
reduced number of public transport options available in the more                          
remote areas of the region which is, in turn, re<U+FB02>ected in greater car                
density.                                                                                      
Finnish children and young people are, in terms of international 
comparisons, very independent in their mobility (Kyttä                      
et al., 2014), and indeed the use of non-active transport did not                    
necessarily mean being driven in a car, but included also independent 
use of the public transportation system. When considering
 the physical activity that can be generated on school                        
journeys, high modal shares for public transportation might seem                     
to be an issue, though some physical activity occurs when walking             
to the transportation stops. Thinking of the mobility issues in more                 
general terms, learning to use public transportation from an early                     
age could see this become a habit thus reducing the need for                               
private car usage. Indeed, it would be interesting to conduct further 
research on whether those children and young people who                                


have used public transportation rather than walked or cycled have
a smaller propensity to become drivers as they grow up into
adulthood. In addition, the amount of physical activity undertaken
by those students using public transport also constitutes a potentially 
interesting area for future research.
Referring back to Mitra's conceptual framework, the strongest
support there was for the domain of proximity i.e. the distance to
school. Longer distances between home and school decreased the
likelihood that active transport modes would be chosen. On distances 
shorter than one kilometre nearly everyone engaged in AST.
In this light, much could be done to increase the perceptions of
traf<U+FB01>c and personal safety or comfort in respect of walking and
cycling by means of planning, but maintaining the neighbourhood
school network, despite the economic pressures to centralise
educational provision, might be the most effective urban planning
strategy to support AST (see also Su et al., 2013) in urban contexts
that are already relatively supportive of AST.
We operationalised the suggested domain of personal safety
with building volumes, based on the assumption that big buildings
related to large retail centres or employment districts may discourage 
AST. Indeed, the bigger the building densities around the
home, the less likely the respondents were to take part in AST. We
suggest that rather than relating to a reduced sense of personal
safety due to big building volumes, the negative relationship between 
building density and AST relates to better public transportation 
availability in these densely built areas.
Building density was, interestingly, the only physical environmental 
variable, apart from distance, persisting in the fully adjusted 
model for the home environment. In general, the home
environment showed signi<U+FB01>cantly less associations with transport
mode choice than the environment en route to school.

Generalising the environment affecting people's mobility and
transportation choices into buffers surrounding the home may not
however be a suitable way to grasp the elements of the environment 
meaningful for an individual. Indeed, most children were
found to use only 25% of the area buffered along the road network
within 800 and 1600 m of their home (Villanueva et al., 2012), or
only a narrow section of the circular buffer around their home (Yin
et al., 2013). Rather than using assumed neighbourhoods then,
future research should instead concentrate on the actual environments 
the respondents use, and explore the associations of
these environments with mobility behaviours.
The domain of maintaining social capital was somewhat awkwardly 
operationalised as the population density near the home
and en route to school, due to the limited nature of the data
available on the social attributes of the environment. It should
however be questioned whether population density is a good representation 
of the ability to maintain social capital, as the relationships 
involved here could be diverse and not linear. Nevertheless, 
previous research in Finland has shown that population
density around children's meaningful places increases both the
odds for active transport to be used while also stating a positive
emotional assessment of the place (Broberg et al., 2013), perhaps
supporting the use of population density. Concentrating more on
the actual environments where this mobility is enacted, be it on

school journeys or to other meaningful places, might also help to
tackle this problematic domain. Panter et al., (2008) have also
discussed how possible motivational elements on the school

journey, such as a friend's house or shops to visit en route or parks

to play in, might in<U+FB02>uence the travel mode. Indeed, empirical
evidence from a small study using mobile phones and GPS devices

to understand children's perceptions of their school journey

(Pooley et al., 2010) supports this view of the importance of the
child's own motivation to move in the environment, as it was
found that pupils who travelled independently were most likely to

engage with their immediate environment.
Methodologically we tried to tackle head on the challenges
posed by AST research outlined by Wong et al. (2011). Such issues

here include the need for accuracy when geocoding the subject's
home location and estimating the school journey route based on
road network data. We have tried to overcome these problems by

letting the subjects pinpoint their home and draw the route taken.
The accuracy of the geographical data produced by children and
young people can of course be questioned, but generally there

have been no real problems in geographical accuracy in our datasets 
concerning children, possibly due to orienteering being part
of the school curriculum. The mapping application also helped

children to orientate on the map by automatically panning the

map to the school selected from a drop-down list. In addition,
Wong et al. (2011) raise the issue of inconsistency in applying the
measures of the built environment, which we have tried to minimise 
by using the measures developed in previous research. Similarly,
we also identi<U+FB01>ed the problem of overlapping buffers
creating high correlation in the built environment data between

subjects. By only including the subjects with school journeys in a
certain range, the data became signi<U+FB01>cantly more dispersed. Finally, 
again as suggested by them, we have used as spatially disaggregated 
data as possible, which in the Finnish setting is quite
easy, as there are spatial datasets concerning for example each
building instead of statistical unit aggregates.

It might be argued that the two age groups included should

have been studied separately, as it is hypothesised that the travel
behaviours of children and young people are different (Mitra,
2013). However, as Finnish children are notably independent in

mobility terms from their early years, we found it reasonable to
analyse the age groups jointly. Nevertheless, in future research
including wider groups of children, the potential impact of age
differences should be taken into account.
