Physical environmental characteristics promoting independent and active
transport to children’s meaningful places

Research on urban structural characteristics promoting physical activity is often focussing on just few of
the settings where children and youth spend their time. To overcome this, we used mapping methodology 
where children themselves de<U+FB01>ned their important places. Then, the associations between the
urban structure and children’s active transport and independent mobility were studied. Principal
component analysis was used to compose multivariate pro<U+FB01>les of physical environment around meaningful 
places. We found that structure dominated by single family housing promoted both independent
mobility and use of active transport modes. Dense urban residential structure allowed for independent
mobility but did not promote active transport.

Introduction                                                                                
											
Children’s physical activity and active transportation (van Loon                  
& Frank, 2011; Mikkelsen & Christensen, 2009; Pont, Ziviani,                   
Wadley, Bennett, & Abbott, 2009) and related obesity (Dunton,                      
Kaplan, Wolch, Jerrett, & Reynolds, 2009) in different physical                  
environments are themes that have been widely researched in                       
recent years. Commonly, this body of research hopes to discover               
which elements of the physical environment could promote                      
physical activity in children and young people, who are becoming             
increasingly overweight and are getting less and less exercise.                 
The research on environments promoting physical activity has                 
often concentrated on some speci<U+FB01>c locations or trips, when in fact              
children’s physical activity takes place in a variety of places (van                  
Loon & Frank, 2011). The focus has too often been on the built                 
environment surrounding a child’s home, school or on some                              
speci<U+FB01>c structures, such as parks. In addition, much of the research            
has concentrated on mobility on trips to school (e.g. Spinney &                        
Millward, 2011). In their study on London children, Steinbach,                         
Green, and Edwards (2012) found no signi<U+FB01>cant environmental                        
correlates of walking on the school journey, but several that were                
associated with walking outside the school commute and at                      
weekends or during holidays. The writers hypothesise that the                             
walking environment plays a bigger role in the travel mode choice            
for the optional trips.                                                                    
physical activity in children aged 10e11 years. It has also been

Rather than narrowing the scope of our research to a few
locations and trips, the focus should be on the multiple environments 
where children and young people spend their time. Indeed,
only a third of the daily trips Finnish children make are to and from
school, while 52 per cent of the trips are made due to leisure
activities and the remaining 15 per cent due to shopping and other
errands (Finnish Transport Agency, 2012). Moreover, concentrating
on some speci<U+FB01>c locations, such as parks, and researching their role
in promoting physical activity, is problematic. While green environments 
as settings for physical activity are widely studied,
a recent study (Wheeler, Cooper, Page, & Jago, 2010) found that as
little as 7e9 per cent of daily physical activity happened in parks.
Physical activity can be measured quantitatively using accelerometers 
or heart rate monitoring. When a global positioning
system (GPS) is added to the equipment, information on the location 
of the activity becomes available, allowing the physical environment 
to be analysed (see e.g. Rainham et al., 2012; Rodríguez
et al., 2012). Technical solutions are not the only way of
measuring physical activity, but the qualitative aspects of children’s
physical activity can also be successfully studied. Namely, independent 
mobility e the possibility to travel to places alone e or
activity of transport mode can be used as qualitative proxies for
physical activity. Page, Cooper, Griew, Davis, and Hillsdon (2009)
have shown that self-reported independent mobility (to eleven
queried destinations) is related to objectively measured weekday
reliably shown that children who report active commute modes,
walking or cycling on their school journey accumulate signi<U+FB01>cantl

                                   						
more objectively measured physical activity (Faulkner, Buliung,
Flora, & Fusco, 2009).
Research methods used for studying the physical environment
also need some reconsideration. Lately, research reporting individually 
de<U+FB01>ned built environment for each subject (known as
buffer studies) instead of using administrative boundaries has
become increasingly common, as the review by Feng, Glass,
Curriero, Stewart, and Schwartz (2010) shows. While the use of
geographically de<U+FB01>ned buffers has made the comparison of study
<U+FB01>ndings easier, Ding and Gebel (2012) still stress the importance of
identifying and de<U+FB01>ning the place, and continue by suggesting that
environments outside residential neighbourhoods should also be
considered while studying the physical environment correlates of
active living. One advance towards the direction of studying
multiple physical activity settings with a detailed de<U+FB01>nition of the
environment is reported by Cervero and Duncan (2003), who have
studied the physical environment’s effects on cycling and walking,
by buffering both the origins and the destinations of trips.
Despite these advances, more systematic, representative and
location-sensitive research is still needed that takes into account
the varying environment usage patterns of children. We propose
that emphasis should be placed on the multiple activity settings
where children spend their time, and on the physical environment
of these settings. The children can be given the possibility to inform
research on their meaningful places, as de<U+FB01>ned by themselves. For
example, Wridt (2010) has utilised a qualitative GIS approach in
studying simultaneously children’s own perceptions of their
neighbourhood and the actual activity potentials of speci<U+FB01>c physical 
settings. We suggest that the ways in which the multiple places
promote physical activity by allowing for active transportation and
independent mobility can be studied using self-reported information 
on children’s mobility to these places. The environment around
these places and its associations to the independence and activity
of transport to the places can nevertheless be studied in a quantitative 
manner.

In many cases, researchers have concentrated on single, objectively 
measured environmental variables and their effect on children’s 
physical activity, or they have studied multiple
environmental variables separately, without commenting on how
these variables correlate (Lin & Yu, 2011). The associations between
physical activity and multiple, individually studied variables can be
dif<U+FB01>cult to interpret, and the results might sometimes seem internally 
contrasting. To overcome this, some trials have been made to
bring multiple physical environmental variables together. Maybe
the most widely known composite measure is the walkability index
(Frank et al., 2006), which incorporates land use mix, street
connectivity, net residential density, and retail <U+FB02>oor area ratios.
Lately, researchers have tried to address the problem of interrelationships 
between built environment variables by using principle 
component or factor analysis, in order to compress multiple
GIS-derived variables into fewer dimensions that can then be used
in further analysis (Boone-Heinonen, Guilkey, Evenson, & Gordon-Larsen, 
2010; Cervero & Duncan, 2003; Song & Knaap, 2007; Yan,
Voorhees, Clifton, & Burnier, 2010). Another statistical technique
is latent pro<U+FB01>le analysis, which has been used to build multivariate
pro<U+FB01>les of the neighbourhood recreation environment in relation to
adolescent physical activity (Norman et al., 2010). Relying more on
geostatistical methods, Buck et al. (2011) used the kernel density
method to calculate the density of sidewalks, cycle paths, intersections, 
public transport stations, public playgrounds, sports
facilities, and parks and green spaces. They also analysed the residential 
density and land use mix, after which they made these nine
variables comparable and calculated a moveability index.
In this study, we use principal component analysis to compose
multivariate pro<U+FB01>les of the physical environment around

meaningful places that children have marked on maps. We further
analyse whether some environments, as de<U+FB01>ned by these multivariate 
pro<U+FB01>les, promote children’s active transport and independent 
mobility to these places. We de<U+FB01>ne active transport as walking
or cycling to the place (Larsen et al., 2009; McDonald, 2007;
McMillan, Day, Boarnet, Alfonzo, & Anderson, 2006; Mota et al.,
2007). Independent mobility is often de<U+FB01>ned as being able to
move without adult supervision (Hillman, Adams, & Whitelegg,
1990; Page, Cooper, Griew, & Jago, 2010), or more detailed accompaniment 
can be questioned (Romero, 2010). We de<U+FB01>ne independence 
as travelling to the location alone. In this study, our aim is to
<U+FB01>nd relevant co-occurring environmental attributes that promote
children’s physical activity, using active transport and independent
mobility as proxies of physical activity. To inform the researchers
and practitioners about the locations of actual environments that
satisfy these activity-promoting attributes, the analysis is also
presented with maps.

Method

Data collection method and procedure

We suggest that a place-based research strategy is not possible
without a speci<U+FB01>c methodology. In this study, an Internet-based
softGIS survey (Kahila & Kyttä, 2009; Kyttä, 2011) was used to
study children’s independent mobility and active transport to their
meaningful places. The softGIS methodology developed at Aalto
University, Finland, is an advanced example of Public Participation
GIS (PPGIS, see Brown, 2012) that enables the mapping of environmental 
experiences and daily behaviour practices with respect
to speci<U+FB01>c locations. The softGIS methodology has been developed
together with urban planners and other actors in the health
promotion <U+FB01>eld, professionals from social, health, cultural, education, 
youth work and other sectors in an attempt to produce
applicable knowledge for these multisectoral actors.
In the softGIS survey for children (Fig. 1), the respondents used
the Internet interface to mark places on a map that were functionally, 
emotionally or socially meaningful. They also described
how accessible these places were, in terms of independent mobility
and active transport. Moreover, the respondents were asked to
mark their home and daily routes to school, and to answer questionnaires 
concerning school journeys, perceived health and wellbeing. 
The data was collected in 17 schools from six residential
areas of Helsinki, Finland, during the autumn of 2009. The ethics
board from the Education Board of the City of Helsinki approved the
research, and informed consent was gathered from both the
responding children and their parents. The six residential areas
represent different urban structures ranging from the inner city
urban core to suburbs built in the 1950s, and fringe areas dominated 
by single-family housing. The data collection was organised
in computer equipped classrooms, led by a research assistant. A
total of 901 children, of whom 47 per cent were from year 5
(approximately 11 years of age), and 53 per cent from year 8
(approximately 14), participated and marked a total of 5211
meaningful places.

Outcome variables

With each meaningful place marked on the map, the respondents 
were asked how they travelled to the location. Independent
mobility was measured with the question “With whom do you
travel to this place?” The selectable options were alone, with
friends, and accompanied by an adult. The answers were recoded
into a dichotomous variable: coming to the place alone (1) as
opposed to with friends or adults (0).

The transport mode to the place was measured with the question 
“How do you get to this place?” The selectable options were
walking or riding a bike, using public transport, and being driven in
a car. A dichotomous variable was created: active transport (on foot
or by bicycle) used to travel to the place (1), and journey made
inactively, using car or public transportation (0).

Physical environmental variables

The physical environment of the localisations was studied by
building a 50-m buffer zone around each meaningful place. This
buffer size was selected to study the immediate surroundings of the
places and to allow enough variance in the environmental variables.
The bigger the buffer size is, the more the environmental characteristics 
are generalised. A total of 14 GIS-based measures were
calculated within this buffer and included six land use variables, four
variables of building or residential density, three traf<U+FB01>c environment
variables, and one variable concerning the recreational possibilities.

 Land use mix (as de<U+FB01>ned by Frank, Andresen, & Schmid, 2004)
was calculated as the evenness between proportions of residential, 
commercial, of<U+FB01>ce and institutional land use. Other
land use-related variables were proportions of <U+FB01>ve different
land uses within the buffer. The proportions were calculated
for green areas (i.e. parks and forests), single-family residential


areas, semi-detached housing residential areas, apartment
building residential areas, and traf<U+FB01>c areas.
 The size of the population within the buffer was calculated as
well as the number of housing units per hectare in the same
area. To further analyse the density of the built environment,
the number of buildings within the buffer was calculated, and
the <U+FB02>oor area ratio was computed as the gross <U+FB02>oor area within
the buffer divided by the whole area of the buffer.
 Traf<U+FB01>c environment was operationalised as the number of
intersections with three or more road segments (Frank,
Saelens, Powell, & Chapman, 2007; Leslie et al., 2007) within
the buffer, excluding motorways and other non-walkable roads
from the analysis, and as the distance from the place to the
nearest public transport stop and the number of public transport 
stops within the buffer.
 Lastly, the distance from the place to the nearest recreational
facility was calculated, as the crow <U+FB02>ies.

These fourteen variables were used in further analysis of the
physical environment. In addition to the above-mentioned variables,
the distance (as the crow <U+FB02>ies) from home to the important places
was calculated, and this distance measure was used in adjusted
models. The distance of the trip is constantly found to be in inverse
relationship with children’s active transportation (Pont et al., 2009).
Rather than treating distance as a measure of physical environment,
we think it should be seen as a mediating factor between the environment 
and children’s active or independent transportation.

GIS datasets

Four different geographical datasets were used to analyse the
physical environment of the meaningful places marked by
respondents. The information concerning land use was calculated
from the SLICES dataset. Population and building density-related
variables were drawn from the building centroid data, and a Digi-road 
dataset was used to analyse intersection density and public
transportation facilities. Lastly, the distance between a point and its
nearest recreation facility was measured with the LIPAS dataset.
SLICES (Separated land use & cover information system) is
a raster dataset produced by the Finnish National Land Survey. The
dataset was produced by combining different geographical datasets
on land use from different organisations, such as the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry, the Ministry of the Environment, the
National Land Survey, the Finnish Forest Research Institute, Finland’s 
environmental administration and the Population Register
Centre. The dataset offers a hierarchical classi<U+FB01>cation of land use,
land cover, soil types and special use and restricted areas. The SLI-CES 
dataset covers the whole of Finland with a resolution of 10 m.
The building centroid dataset for each building in Helsinki,
containing the information on housing units, <U+FB02>oor areas and population 
demographics for the building, was obtained from the city


administration.
Digiroad is a national database which contains precise and
accurate data on the location of all roads and streets in Finland as
well as their most important physical features. There are also other
transport system-related objects, such as public transport stops.
The Finnish Transport Agency maintains and updates the data in
the Digiroad system.
LIPAS is a nationwide geographic information system on sports
facilities, recreation areas and hiking trails. The Department of
Sport Science at the University of Jyväskylä is responsible for the
system and cooperates with the Ministry of Education and Culture,
the Finnish municipalities, the Finnish Sports Federation and other
sports organisations in maintaining the information on recreational
facilities.

Analysis

The urban structural variables were extracted from register-based 
geographical data using ESRI ArcMap version 10. The main
geoprocessing techniques used were buffering the meaningful
places, and calculating statistics from the building points within
these buffer polygons. Nearest neighbourhood analysis was used
between the point datasets containing the meaningful places and
public transport stops as well as sports facilities. Different raster
calculation and focal statistical methods were used to calculate
variables concerning each meaningful place from the land use
dataset.
To reduce the number of urban structural variables, a principle
component analysis with Varimax rotation and Kaiser normalisation 
(Cervero & Duncan, 2003; Miles & Song, 2009; Song &
Knaap, 2007; Yan et al., 2010) was performed using IBM’s SPSS
statistical package, version 20. The principal components discovered 
were used to compute principal component scores for every
meaningful place as if principal components had been observed
themselves. Thus each meaningful place had several new variables
representing the loadings for each principal component. These new
variables were to be used as independent variables in analyses
explaining the variation of independent access or active transport
to the meaningful places, instead of using the original urban
structural variables.
Simple logistic regression analysis was used to explain travelling
alone as well as using active transport modes to get to the meaningful 
places. We controlled for the age group, whether the family
owned a car, and the distance of the place from the respondent’s
home. Because the observed values of dependent variables were
correlated positively (see Fig. 3), simple logistic regression, which is
based on the assumption of independent observations, could not
count for all variations that existed in the population, which means
there would be overdispersion in the models. In order to verify
overdispersion in models based on simple logistic regression,
residuals from models were saved. If models could not account for
the mentioned “extra” variation caused by positive correlation of
observations of dependent variables, there would be also positive
spatial correlation between residuals. In other words, there would
be unwanted spatial autocorrelation (SAC) between residuals in
models, which violates the assumption of non-correlated residuals
in a regression model.
To study the possibly existing SAC, empirical semivariograms 
were calculated for model residuals using geoR library
in statistical program R (Ribeiro & Diggle, 2001). Empirical
semivariograms simply measure how much the values
of residuals resemble each other on average at a certain
distance.

where m is the number of pairs of residuals at a distance h apart.
The empirical semivariogram gðhÞ is estimated for all distances of
same length, i.e. for distances from 0 to 30 m, 30 to 60 m and so on,
and yi is the value of a measure at the ith location, and yj is that for
a point at distance g from yi.
As an example, Fig. 2a represents an empirical semivariogram of
a model where travelling alone was explained with principal
component 4 and the control variables. The <U+FB01>gure clearly shows
how residuals with shorter distances between each other differ less
from each other than those with longer distances between them.
The empirical semivariogram reaches a relatively stable level after
the distance between residuals grows to more than 1000 m, which
is also the distance after which SAC is near zero.

The presence of spatial autocorrelation (SAC) between                                          
residuals in a regression model violates the assumption of non-correlated 
residuals and in<U+FB02>ates type I errors, which may even                                  
cause bias in regression coef<U+FB01>cient estimates (see e.g. Dormann                                 
et al., 2007; Kühn, 2007). One statistical solution to overcome                                 
the SAC in regression analysis is the geographically weighted                                   
regression (Brunsdon, Fotheringham, & Charlton, 1996; Cardozo,                                  
García-Palomares, & Gutiérrez, 2012; Chen & Truong, 2012).                                      
Another solution to overcome the overdispersion in models is to                                 
use techniques based on generalised linear mixed models                                         
(GLMM). The effectiveness of this solution comes from the fact                                 
that the positive “extra” correlation or variance is included in                               
the model observation-wise (or residual-wise) as random                                       
effects.                                                                                      
													
Equations (2) and (3) represent a simple linear model and
a linear mixed model, respectively. In logistic regression there is
additionally the logistic link function between dependent variable
Y and the model. In our solution to the overdispersion problem, SAC
is simply taken as random effects of the model, here represented by
u. It has the dimension of a number of observations. A detailed
explanation of using GLMM in modelling spatial variation is
provided by Littell, Milliken, Stroup, Wol<U+FB01>nger, and Schabenberger
(2006). In this way, all “extra” correlation in original models can be
taken into these models, and the independence of residuals is
attained, i.e. SAC between residuals will be zero at all distances. In
practice, this was done by using the Glimmix procedure in the SAS
statistical program. The Glimmix procedure is especially designed
to estimate generalised linear mixed models. In addition, it has
a feature that allows spatial variability to be modelled as explained.
Empirical semivariograms were calculated for residuals from
models estimated by the Glimmix procedure. In Fig. 2b, an empirical 
semivariogram is represented as an example for a model in
which travelling alone was explained with principal component 4											            
													

Here the empirical semivariogram is level at all distances. This
indicates that SAC between residuals is close to zero and that there
is no overdispersion. This applied also for the other models represented 
in the result section, so the estimates of coef<U+FB01>cients and
their standard errors from these models could be trusted. It is
worth noting here that models including principal component 5
did not have any unwanted SAC between residuals, so simple
logistic regression could be used. This also means that principal
component 5 effectively explained why residuals near to each other
resembled each other.

Results

Descriptive statistics

The respondents were able to travel to their meaningful places
fairly independently and actively (see Table 1). With younger children, 
the proportion of places travelled to in the company of an adult
was signi<U+FB01>cantly higher than in the older age group, but in all the
proportions of places that were visited with an adult were as low as
14 per cent and 10 per cent respectively (c2 ¼ 23.3, df ¼ 2, p ¼ .000).
Younger children travelled signi<U+FB01>cantly more often to the places on
foot or by bicycle, while older children used public transport, with
the proportion of places travelled to by car being the same (8 per
cent) (c2 ¼ 115.7, df ¼ 2, p ¼ .000). The places marked by the older
group were also signi<U+FB01>cantly further away from home, on average
3.5 km from home, than those marked by the younger group, 2.2 km
respectively (t ¼ 12.5, df ¼ 4771, p ¼ .000). There were no signi<U+FB01>cant
gender differences in terms of independence or activity in travelling
to the places. Therefore, regression analyses reported later on are
adjusted for the age group, but gender is not taken into account.
The spatial pattern of the meaningful places and with whom
and how respondents travelled to these places is represented in
Fig. 3. The urban structure where these places are located is of
rather low density, even if many of the places are in Helsinki city
centre. The residential densities were in some cases as high as 450
housing units per hectare in the densest areas, but still the average
density was just a little over 27 units/ha. On average, different


residential land uses account for roughly one-quarter of the land
cover, traf<U+FB01>c accounting for one-<U+FB01>fth of the land cover and green
areas approximately 30 per cent (see Table 1). Generally, the
distances to public transport stops or recreation facilities are short
from the meaningful places, on average some 200 m to a bus stop
and 170 m to a recreation facility.

Reducing the fourteen structural variables to <U+FB01>ve principal
components

In the hope of reducing the number of structural variables from
the original fourteen to a smaller amount to help with the analysis
and interpretation of the results, a principal component analysis
was performed. The analysis produced a solution of <U+FB01>ve principal
components (see Table 2) with Eigen-values of one or more. These
components explained 72 per cent of the total variance of the
original variables.
High scores in the <U+FB01>rst principal component (PC1) were associated 
with large populations and high numbers of housing units as
well as a high proportion of land area covered with apartment
buildings. Fig. 4 represents the spatial pattern of the meaningful
places and the loadings for each principal component as derived
from the built environment surrounding these places. Meaningful
places that have high loadings on the <U+FB01>rst principal component can
mainly be found in the densely built-up residential areas of the
central Helsinki peninsula. The second principal component (PC2)
was characterised by large numbers of buildings, and high
proportions of single-family or semi-detached housing as land use.
On the map representing the second of these components, two
distinct areas of high loading can be seen on northern single-family
housing-dominated residential areas. Traf<U+FB01>c-related land uses and
a large number of intersections were associated with high scores of
the third principal component (PC3). In addition, greater land use
mix and a smaller proportion of green areas were associated with
higher scores. The third map in Fig. 4, depicting the spatial pattern
of principal component scores for PC3, shows a less clear pattern of
high loadings, both in Helsinki city centre and along main roads
throughout the study area.
High scores on the fourth principal component (PC4) were
associated only with long distances to the nearest bus stop and
recreational facility, while the <U+FB01>fth component (PC5) was characterised 
by high <U+FB02>oor area ratios and the large number of bus stops.
High loadings on the fourth component are mainly concentrated on
the remote islands and coastal areas, while low loadings are
concentrated around sports facilities. The high loadings on the <U+FB01>fth

component are found especially near big shopping centres in the

city centre and the malls along the ring roads, and some transport
hubs can also be distinguished on the map.

Associations of the urban structure components on independent
mobility and active transport

The principal components of urban structure had highly
signi<U+FB01>cant associations with the independent mobility to meaningful 
places, as shown in Table 3 (part a). Higher scores on
components PC2 and PC4, signifying single-family housing and
long distances from public transport and sports facilities, increased
the likelihood of travelling to the place alone. In addition, dense

residential structure (PC1) increased the probability of travelling to

the place alone, but this association was less signi<U+FB01>cant. Component 
PC5 that had high loadings of <U+FB02>oor area ratio and the number
of public transport stops had an inverse association with independent 
mobility. That is, the higher the loading on PC5, the


smaller the probability of travelling to the place alone. The
component associated with traf<U+FB01>c land use and few green areas

(PC3) did not have a signi<U+FB01>cant association with the independence                          
of mobility to the place.                                                                  
The associations between urban structure and active transport                          
to meaningful places were less profound, but still signi<U+FB01>cant in                           
many cases (Table 3, part b). High loadings on principal components 
PC1 and PC3 lessened the likelihood of travelling to the place                       
on foot or by bicycle, while higher loadings of PC2 increased the                          
likelihood. That is, the more single-family dominated the urban                            
structure around the place is, the likelier it was that the place was                    

travelled to actively, while traf<U+FB01>c domination and a dense resi
dential fabric around the place discouraged active transport. The
probability of travelling to the place using active transport
decreased as loading of principal component PC5 increased. The
highest loadings of this component are indeed particularly found in
city centre shopping venues and the malls along ring roads, and it is
not surprising that the association with both active transport and
independent mobility is negative. PC4 did not have statistically
signi<U+FB01>cant association with active transportation. Age group was

signi<U+FB01>cant in all the models explaining active transport to the
meaningful places, but not in the models explaining independent
mobility. The respondent family’s car ownership status was
signi<U+FB01>cant only in the model looking at associations between PC2
and independent mobility.
The most signi<U+FB01>cant urban structural elements promoting
children’s independent and active mobility seem to be associated
with a residential urban structure dominated by single-family
housing. Structure quali<U+FB01>ed by a denser population structure and
apartment buildings still allows for independent mobility but does
not promote active transport. Signi<U+FB01>cant negative effects on the
probability of moving independently and actively are found for
structures characterised by high <U+FB02>oor area ratios and a large
number of public transport stops/stations. The urban structures
determined by remoteness, either to public transport stops/stations
or recreation facilities, and by intensive traf<U+FB01>c had less clear associations 
with children’s physical activity.

Discussion and conclusions

While the evidence base on urban structural characteristics
promoting physical activity and independent mobility is rapidly
expanding, the focus has often been on the built environment
surrounding a child’s home, school or on some speci<U+FB01>c structures,
such as parks. This study is the <U+FB01>rst to our knowledge to study the
multiple environments where children and young people spend
their time, and to assess the associations between the urban
structure around these multiple environments and children’s
mobility to these places. We let children themselves de<U+FB01>ne their
important places, and created <U+FB01>ve principal components of the
urban structural variables surrounding these places. The associations 
between urban structure and independent mobility and
active transport were multi-faceted. Firstly, we found that structures 
dominated by single-family housing promoted both independent 
mobility and the use of active transport modes, even when
the distance to places was controlled for. This <U+FB01>nding is in contrast
with most of the existing research, where the common conclusion
has been that the suburban structure hinders active transportation.
Of course, the Finnish suburban structure differs from the classic
examples where cul-de-sacs and curved roads without sidewalks
Geography 38 (2013) 43e52
are typical. Still, a number of similar <U+FB01>ndings have been made, for
example Seliske, Pickett, and Janssen (2012) research on Canadian


young people, where they reported urban sprawl being associated
with active transportation and moderate to vigorous physical

activity. However, this research was conducted on a macro level

and analysed Canadian census metropolitan areas rather than the

individual home environments of the young people in question.

Another signi<U+FB01>cant <U+FB01>nding was that dense urban residential
structures allowed for independent mobility but it did not promote
active transport. Rather than use bicycles or walk, children used
public transport in the most densely built-up residential areas. In


earlier research concerning Finnish children’s active transport, the
residential density of the children’s home environment has been
found to be positively associated with an active school travel mode,
but this setting was less densely built up and offered fewer public

transport options (Kyttä, Broberg, & Kahila, 2012). The places that

were characterised by large <U+FB02>oor area ratios and a large number of
public transport stops/stations were less likely to be travelled to
actively and independently. The highest loadings on this principal
component could be found on shopping malls, both in the city

centre and on the ring roads. It is no surprise that active transport
modes are not used when travelling to these places, and it is likely


that the adult population would choose to drive to these kinds of

places.
In general, the study revealed that, as a whole, the Finnish
children who took part in this study enjoyed widespread possibilities 
for active and independent mobility. There were no gender
differences, but the age of the child was signi<U+FB01>cantly associated
with independence and activity. One variable that was signi<U+FB01>cant in
all the models was the distance from home to the place marked on
the map. Pont et al. (2009) have mentioned in their review that
distance is the most frequently examined physical environmental
determinant of children’s active transport, and that there is
convincing evidence of increasing distance travelled being
inversely associated with active transport. We argue that distance
should not be seen as a measure of physical environment, but
rather as an intervening factor between the environment and
children’s active or independent transport. We propose that certain
physical environments might produce trips that are longer than
trips in other environments. Hence the distance should always be
taken into account when associations between different urban
structural variables and transport mode or independence are
studied.
It can be argued that these <U+FB01>ndings represent a situation in
a Nordic city, where the urban structure in general is very suitable
for active transport, and where parental fears and resulting
mobility restrictions for children are still very scarce (Kyttä, 2004).
Hence, the results might have no applicability to other settings.
Still, some general observations can be made in relation to planning
practice. A rather low density residential structure dominated by
single-family housing seems not to be a bad planning solution e at
least in the form realised in Helsinki. However, the settings studied
in this project represent suburban areas built in the 1950s and
1960s that are part of the wider urban structure. When new residential 
areas are being built, it is important to incorporate the links
to the existing urban structure and to secure the public transport
options, <U+FB01>rstly to allow for children’s independent mobility, and
secondly to <U+FB01>ght the increasing traf<U+FB01>c and the need for traf<U+FB01>c land
use resulting from new residential development. The residential
density question is not straightforward, because different types of
urban fabric allow for different types of mobility. In a dense urban
setting, children did not get to move actively but instead travelled
by bus, tram, train or metro. The transport mode should not be the
only consideration when thinking about the possibilities of
different urban settings to promote activity e children’s


possibilities for moving independently, be it on foot or by public
transport, should be considered. Independent mobility in a local
environment is considered to be an essential part of a child’s
development. By moving independently, children develop an
understanding of their surrounding environment, build up
a personal relationship with it and develop mapping and route<U+FB01>nding 
abilities. Finally, children and young people should be
considered when designing urban cores. These are important places 
where children travel to using relatively inactive modes of
transport, and that don’t generally allow for activities that include
physical activity, whereas for the use of younger children there are
playgrounds even in the city centre.

The strengths of this study included the use of a methodology
that allowed children to de<U+FB01>ne their important places and mobility
to these places. This allowed us to widen the focus of research from
the built environment around home or the school journey to the
many settings where children spend their time. Using principal
component analysis to build composite indices also proved to be
a valuable method for capturing several aspects of the built environment 
at once (as proposed by Feng et al., 2010). However, some
limitations arise from the use of the principal component loadings
as the independent urban structural variables. The range of the
initial variables measuring the physical environment is often
dictated by the availability of GIS data, which was the case here, too.
One could claim that when studying urban structure associations
with children’s mobility, the urban structural analyses should
consider the possibilities for light traf<U+FB01>c and functions of the urban
environment, like shops, restaurants and playgrounds, to name but
a few. Additionally, the principal components used in the analyses
were derived from the initial data concerning the physical environment 
of the places, and other PCA solutions might arise in other
settings, where the environment is different. These solutions would
not be comparable with the principal urban structural components
derived from this dataset. Data on the socio-economic setting of the
meaningful places was also lacking from our analysis. Children’s
physical activity is partly affected by the physical structure, but the
social structure plays a big role. Ideally, some variables concerning
the settings of the meaningful places would have been analysed
simultaneously, but as these variables are generally available on an
aggregate level, a multilevel modelling approach (Antipova, Wang,
& Wilmot, 2011) would have been necessary.
De<U+FB01>ning independent mobility as travelling to the place alone
can also be questioned. Mikkelsen and Christensen (2009)
observed in Danish children that the independence of mobility
was not necessarily moving alone, but moving without adults,
among peers. Even though we agree on children’s mobility being
utterly social, in this study we used the narrow de<U+FB01>nition of travelling 
to the important place alone as a measure of independence.
This is due to the limited parental attendance that the children
reported: less than 15 per cent for both age groups. In other, more
restricting mobility contexts, it would be worthwhile to use the
broader de<U+FB01>nition of independent mobility. Similarly, it can be
argued that using public transport is at least partly an active mode
of transport, considering the need to walk to a stop or a station.
The way we analysed the collated softGIS data in this study
represents a very quantitative way of looking at children’s meaningful 
places and their mobility to these. The spatial character of the
data allows zooming in to the actual locations of the meaningful
places and looking at the environment in a more qualitative way. In
future research, we hope to include children’s perceptions of the
environment as mediators between the objectively measured
environment and children’s use of the environment e their physical 
activity, active transport and independent mobility in the
environment (as suggested also by van Loon & Frank, 2011). It
would also be valuable to include the parents in the studies, as
children’s mobility is signi<U+FB01>cantly dictated by their parents, the
social environment and the values of society.