Evaluating safe routes to school events that designate days for walking
and bicycling

abstract
This paper presents a case study evaluation of days designated for walking and bicycling as part of a Safe
Routes to School program. The case study examines two elementary schools in Moscow, Idaho that
annually participate in two designated days for walking and bicycling, “International Walk to School Day”
in the fall and “Fill the Racks!” in the spring. Students walking or bicycling to school were counted before
and after the events. For comparison, counts were also observed at a nearby school not involved with the
Safe Routes to School program. Count data was collected for 8 days. Furthermore, 45 students and 17
arents were surveyed; and <U+FB01>ve parents and four community leaders were interviewed. The count data
showed a signi<U+FB01>cant increase in students using active modes of travel on the day of the event and a few
weeks later. The interviews and surveys showed, among other things, there is strong support for the
special events and most parents felt the designated days increased their child's motivation to walk to
school. Many parents said the spring event prompted their child to return to walking to school after the
cold winter months. Policy implications and other lessons learned are provided.


1. Introduction                                                                     
										
Safe Routes to School (SR2S)1 programs in the United States                      
emphasize encouragement as a means to increase walking and                         
bicycling to school. The National Center for Safe Routes to School             
(NCSRTS) suggests that local programs designate two special days                     
for encouraging walking and bicycling to school. The <U+FB01>rst                               
event, “International Walk to School Day,” is held in October and             
the second event, “National Bike to School Day,” is held in May                    
as part of National Bike Month (NCSRTS, 2012). Many local SR2S                    
programs advertise the events with posters and <U+FB02>yers sent home              
with students and often the events involve incentives, prizes, and              
fun activities. The goal of the events is to reverse the national                       
trend of fewer and fewer students walking or bicycling to school                        
(an estimated decline from 42% in 1969 to less than 15% in 2001)                         
(McDonald, 2007).                                                                      
Are these events effective? Do the bene<U+FB01>ts outweigh the costs?                   
Should funds be directed toward encouragement events? From                               
2005 to 2012 dedicated federal funds were directed to SR2S, but                        
											
the recent transportation bill, MAP-21, consolidated the available
funds into a competitive process with other programs related to
recreational trails, environmental mitigation, other pedestrian and
bicycle needs, and minor road projects. Furthermore, states can
now choose to opt out and transfer 50% of this smaller pool of
funds to other uses, such as bridge rehabilitation. If there is a state
emergency, 100% of the funds can be taken for rebuilding damaged
highways. In the past, states could only transfer 10–15% of these
funds to other programs (America Bikes, 2012). This dramatic
competition-focused change in funding for SR2S intensi<U+FB01>es the
need to evaluate all aspects of the program and determine which
speci<U+FB01>c activities are the most effective.
Over the past few years most research related to SR2S has
focused on identifying barriers to active travel (such as distance
from home, safety concerns, and parent perceptions), while very
little research has focused on program evaluation (Weigand,
2008). The few program evaluation studies that have been
published do not address speci<U+FB01>c program activities, but rather
provide broad before-and-after evaluation of an entire program
(Weigand, 2008). One challenge with achieving focused, activity-speci<U+FB01>c 
evaluation is that local programs differ widely, each with
its own unique activities. There are, however, a few program
activities commonly done across the country. For example, most
local SR2S programs participate in the designated days for walking
and bicycling.

This paper presents a case study evaluation of a speci<U+FB01>c SR2S
activity: designated days for walking and bicycling. Data from six
different sources are examined: count data for two schools for a
fall SR2S event, count data for three schools for a spring SR2S
event (including a control school that was not participating in the
SR2S event); a student intercept survey; an online parent survey;
phone interviews with parents; and phone interviews with key
community leaders. Although the results are only a snapshot of a
small case study, the <U+FB01>ndings and recommendations are relevant
for any SR2S program. Furthermore, the process for data collection
and analysis described in this paper serves as a model for SR2S
practitioners seeking to evaluate special encouragement events.


2. Background

Encouragement is one of <U+FB01>ve “E's” at the center of the SR2S
program. The other “E's” are evaluation, education, engineering,
and enforcement. The program and its goals can be traced back to
Denmark in the 1970s. A few local programs in the US have been
around since those early years, but the federal US program began
in 2005 with a surface transportation bill allocating $612 million
through 2009 (Hubsmith, 2006). Each year until 2012, the program
was continued through short-term extensions of the expired
surface transportation bill. Federal dollars were allocated to the
states based on student enrollment with no state receiving less
than $1 million. Each state department of transportation was
responsible for administering the funds to local SR2S programs.
The recent transportation bill, MAP-21, consolidated the SR2S
program with other programs related to bicycle and pedestrian
travel, environmental mitigation, and minor road enhancements.
As a result, the Safe Routes to School National Partnership
estimates there will be as much as a 70% reduction in available
funds (Safe Routes to School National Partnership, 2010). The new,
highly competitive process to obtain funding and anticipated
efforts to restore dedicated funds in the next transportation bill
signi<U+FB01>cantly increases the need for thorough evaluation of the
program's effectiveness. The following is a review of commonly
used SR2S evaluation tools and formal evaluation studies.


2.1. Tools for evaluation

A number of organizations have developed easy to use evaluation 
tools for local programs. The NCSRTS provides numerous
resources to start and maintain a local SR2S program, including
the “In-Class Travel Tally” to help determine mode share to and
from school (NCSRTS, 2012). The In-Class Travel Tally is a simple
survey that records a hands up, hands down response to classroom
teachers asking how students traveled to school and how they
plan to travel home. It is recommended that teachers conduct the
travel tally at least two days in a row between Tuesday and
Thursday once in the fall and once in the spring. Local SR2S
programs are encouraged to work with schools to collect the
In-Class Travel Tallies from teachers and submit the data to
NCSRTS headquarters in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. The NCSRTS
archives electronic copies on a password protected website.
In 2008, the NCSRTS collaborated with the Pedestrian and
Bicycle Information Center (PBIC) to create a guide for conducting
program evaluation that includes, among other things, suggestions
for using the In-Class Travel Tally (National Highway Traf<U+FB01>c Safety
Administration, 2008). A study by McDonald et al. (2011) demonstrated 
the reliability of the In-Class Travel Tallies; however, as part
of our case study we examined four years of In-Class Travel Tallies
and found a number of errors and inconsistencies in the data.
The PBIC also provides a “Walkability Checklist” and “Bikeability
Checklist” to assess various aspects of the built environment

(Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center, 2012). These and other
“audits” can be used to increase awareness about the physical
environment and track engineering efforts over time (Kingsbury
et al., 2011). The Safe Routes to School National Partnership,
a coalition building network of organizations, a clearing house website
for sharing ideas about many important topics, including program
evaluation (Safe Routes to School National Partnership, 2010).
Another potential resource is the National Household Travel Survey
(NHTS) through which Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has
collected travel data periodically since 1969 (McDonald, 2007).
In 2011, Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) sponsored a
report entitled the Federal Safe Routes to School Program Evaluation
Plan (NCSRTS, 2011). The report outlines a plan for evaluation over the
next decade and identi<U+FB01>es three key needs: (1) better documentation
of state program processes, (2) more studies concerning program
activities, and (3) more studies concerning safety improvements.


2.2. Evaluation studies


Numerous studies have focused on identifying barriers for children
to walk and bicycle to school, such as weather, distance, parental
attitudes, safety perceptions, school policy, and infrastructure de<U+FB01>ciencies 
(Martin and Carlson, 2005; Ewing et al., 2004; McMillan,
2007, Lorenc et al., 2008; Hume et al., 2009; McDonald and Aalborg,
2009; Stewart et al., 2012; Zuniga, 2012). To illustrate this point, the
following are recent examples from this journal alone. Zuniga (2012)
analyzed 65 parent interviews to determine perceptions about
certain barriers. She concluded that negative perceptions diminish
as active travel becomes more regular. Stewart et al. (2012) identify
what they call the most “common” barriers and offer suggestions
for SR2S practitioners to mitigate these barriers. This journal has also
published a number of articles concerning children's travel behavior
more generally, i.e. not just to and from school, to better understand 
children's mode choice (Fyhri et al., 2011; Lin and Yu, 2011;
Marzoughi, 2011) and children's attitudes toward automobile travel
(Arbour-Nicitopoulos et al., 2012; Kopnina and Williams, 2012).
Traf<U+FB01>c safety evaluation is another topic with considerable
literature; however Dumbaugh and Frank (2007) show that very
little traf<U+FB01>c safety research speci<U+FB01>cally addresses SR2S projects.
Instead, they argue, the safety bene<U+FB01>ts associated with SR2S
programs are often merely assumed and not empirically proven.
Only a few studies have focused on SR2S program evaluation
(Weigand, 2008). Two notable and often-cited studies were done
by Staunton et al. (2003) and Boarnet et al. (2005) showing
increased walking and bicycling in California. Both studies were
broad, before-and-after studies. Evaluation studies that are
activity-speci<U+FB01>c are even more rare; however, this journal has
published a few articles concerning a particular SR2S activity
called a “walking school bus” (Mackett et al., 2003; Kingham and
Ussher, 2005; Collins and Kearns, 2010). A walking school bus is an
opportunity for students to walk in groups led by an adult and
following a pre-determined route to pick up students along the
way. Most walking school bus studies have showed positive
bene<U+FB01>ts, such as the longitudinal study by Collins and Kearns,
2010. Their study showed increased walking rates over a 5-year
period, as well as other related bene<U+FB01>ts (although they note that
walking school buses can sometimes reinforce certain aspects of
an automobile dependent society).
In general, evaluation studies of speci<U+FB01>c SR2S activities are
scarce. We did not <U+FB01>nd any academic evaluations of special event
days. In her review of the literature, Weigand (2008) concludes
that more studies are needed

…to discern the relative in<U+FB02>uence of each program element.
[Because] When several components of a Safe Routes to School
program are started at the same time, it is dif<U+FB01>cult to determine


which [speci<U+FB01>c] components effected a behavior change and
why (Weigand, 2008, p. 10).


3. Data collection

3.1. Case study community

The case study concerns the local SR2S program in Moscow,
Idaho. Since the program's inception in 2006, the Idaho Transportation 
Department has awarded the local program $269,880 for
infrastructure improvements and $103,134 for education and
encouragement activities. A portion of the latter funds, have been
used to support a part-time (12–16 h per week) local SR2S
Coordinator. A key responsibility of the SR2S Coordinator has been
to plan, organize and market three annual designated days for
walking and bicycling. The fall designated day is referred to as
“International Walk to School Day” or “iWalk.” The winter designated 
day is called “Polar Walk” and the spring event is called “Fill
the Racks!” The NCSRTS only began promoting a spring event in
2012 and does not mention a winter event, but all three events
have been a part of Moscow, Idaho's program since 2006.
The SR2S coordinator estimates that 50–60% of her time is
spent preparing for the designated walking and bicycling days
including recruiting parents to help, organizing walking school
buses and bike trains, coordinating with local police to ensure
safety, and working with school administrators and teachers to
promote the events and to integrate walking and bicycling into
appropriate classroom curriculum. The school principals and others
involved feel the designated days are the hallmark of the community's
SR2S program.
Quantitative and qualitative data was collected for the case
study. Practitioners in other communities could use this procedure
as a model for their program.

3.2. Count observation data

In the fall of 2011, volunteers helped count the number of
students walking or bicycling to schools. The volunteers were
assigned locations around two elementary schools, Lena Whitmore 
and McDonald. Counts were recorded in 15 min intervals
from 7:45 to 8:30 am. Data were collected for 3 days: the day
before, the day of the event, and the day after. The goal of the fall
count was to measure the increase in all people walking and
bicycling to school, so both students and adults were counted. Tick
marks were made under the categories walking, bicycling, or other
(skateboarding, in-line skating, etc.).
For the spring 2012 count, data were collected for 5 days: one
day the week before the event, the day before the event, the day of
the event, one day a week later, and one day two weeks after the
event. Count data were collected for the same schools counted for
the fall event, plus an additional third school, Jefferson Elementary
School, in the neighboring city of Pullman, Washington. This was
done to allow a comparison with a school not participating in the
SR2S event. The two cities are 9.5 miles apart and very similar in
terms of demographics and weather. The student body is also very
similar with about 400 students per school and similar home-to-school 
distances of about 1 mile or less. The two cities are
separated by a state border and somewhat isolated from each
other, so it is doubtful that students at Jefferson Elementary would
have been aware of the SR2S event.

3.3. Surveys and interviews

In addition to the count observations, a number of surveys and
interviews were conducted. First, on the morning of the spring
Transport Policy 30 (2013) 294–300
event, students who were walking or bicycling to school were
administered a short questionnaire about their mode choice and
knowledge of the SR2S program. Next, an online survey was sent
to parents using email addresses provided by the local SR2S
Coordinator. It is not possible to determine a response rate because
the email recipients were encouraged to forward the emails to
other parents. The survey questions focused on the bene<U+FB01>ts and
perceived bene<U+FB01>ts from SR2S events that designated a day for
walking and bicycling. For willing respondents, this was followed
by a phone interview of open ended questions. Finally, additional
phone interviews were conducted with key community leaders,
including the Mayor, Police Chief, members of City Council, and
school principals.


4. Findings and discussion

4.1. Count data <U+FB01>ndings

The count data revealed a substantial increase in active travel
on the designated SR2S days. Fig. 1a shows for the fall event there
was a 101% increase in the number of students and parents
walking or bicycling to school compared to the previous day.
Furthermore, the number remained higher the day after the event,
yet it is not clear how long the high numbers might have persisted
as no other counts were made. The count data collected for the
spring event sought to capture a longer time period, so observations 
were made the week before, the week after, and two weeks
after the designated SR2S day. Fig. 1b shows the increased active
travel was sustained for at least two weeks after the event. (The
count numbers are larger for the fall compared to the spring in
part because of rainy and cold spring weather conditions.)
The spring data collection also sought to observe differences in
parent escort levels and the number of students walking in groups.
Con<U+FB01>rming our hypothesis, the number of students with escorting
parents (or other adults) increased by 333% on the designated
SR2S day (Pearson chi-squared¼11.0, p¼ 0.001). Subsequent parent 
interviews con<U+FB01>rmed that many parents saw the event as an
opportunity to have fun with their children. This <U+FB01>nding is
noteworthy because research has shown that parents who escort
their children can effectively, and often unintentionally, teach
them how to safely cross streets and navigate urban settings
merely by example (Morrongiello and Barton, 2009). Furthermore,
the local SR2S coordinator stated that she uses the designated
event days as a critical opportunity to interact with parents and
inform them about the goals of the program.
On the day of the event the number of students walking in a
group increased as well. The median group size increased from
two to three and the maximum group size increased from <U+FB01>ve to
nine. These <U+FB01>ndings demonstrate the potential for organizing a
“walking school bus”. Even without the presence of an adult,
a larger group size may increase safety or perceived safety, and
therefore increase parental willingness to let their child walk to
school.
Jefferson Elementary, the control school that did not participate
in the SR2S event, did not exhibit an increase in students walking
or bicycling on the day of the event or in the weeks following
(Pearson chi-squared¼11.6, p ¼0.009). In fact, there was a large
drop in the number of students walking or bicycling on the day
of the SR2S event which most likely can be attributed to the
inclement weather. The week before the event it was 50 1F (10 1C),
but on the designated SR2S day it was a cold 34 1F (1 1C) and even
snowed a little at all three school locations. The next two weeks
the weather was back up around 50 1F (10 1C). Considering the
weather, the increase in students walking or bicycling for the SR2S
event was even more impressive.


Another <U+FB01>nding from the count data was how the SR2S
program shaped the students decision to choose between walking
and bicycling by emphasizing one mode or the other. For both the
fall and spring events students were encouraged to use any active
mode of travel, but the fall event emphasized walking, while the
spring event emphasized bicycling. Many of the students chose
the emphasized mode. Table 1 shows the percent of counts for
each mode according to event emphasis. The percent of walking
was greater for both events; however, there was a statistically
signi<U+FB01>cant difference between the two events with 17% more
bicycling for the bicycling-emphasized event.

4.2. Student intercept survey response themes

Forty-<U+FB01>ve students walking or bicycling to school were surveyed 
on the morning of the spring SR2S event. The students were
asked when they last used different transportation modes. Forty-
three percent said they walked or biked to school earlier in the
week, but quite a few (14%) said they had never walked or biked

before (see Table 2). Many of the students (46%) said they had
recently ridden to school with family, but many (51%) said they
had never ridden to school with friends. In other words, the SR2S
event increased the number of students traveling with other
students to school.
The students were asked why they think teachers and parents
encourage them to walk or bike to school. They were not
prompted with possible answers and could give multiple reasons.
Most of the students (71%) said for health reasons, such as for
example, “When you walk you burn some energy and you get your
muscles pumping and it's just really good for you.” Another
common (45%) response was for environmental reasons with
comments such as “If everybody uses cars, driving alone, and
don't share [rides], then they cause a lot of pollution and it could
kill the earth.” Some students (23%) said saving money was a
reason to walk to school with comments such as “It saves gas


which costs a lot of money.” A few students (6%) noted that
walking to school was a chance to have fun with their friends.
Likewise, when asked more speci<U+FB01>cally about SR2S events, the
majority said they felt the events were intended to help them
learn about choosing healthy travel choices, very few mentioned
environmental or safety reasons. Most of the students said one of
the reasons they chose to participate was for the prizes they would
get from the SR2S program.


4.3. Parent survey

In general, the survey and phone interviews indicated strong
community support for SR2S events. There were 17 parents who
responded to the online survey. When asked to rate the overall
bene<U+FB01>t of SR2S events, the parents gave an average of 3.82 out of 5
(5 being very bene<U+FB01>cial). Another question listed possible bene<U+FB01>ts
from designated walking and bicycling days; the parents were
asked to indicate which bene<U+FB01>ts they believe to be the <U+FB01>rst and
second most important. The choices included the following:

  Meeting Friends/Socializing
  Educational Bene<U+FB01>ts
  Safety/Decreased Traf<U+FB01>c
  Exercise/Health
  Support for Bicycling or Walking
  Environmental Reasons/Pollution Reduction
  Fun/Enjoyment

The bene<U+FB01>t chosen most frequently was “Exercise/Health” to
which 71% of respondents said it was either <U+FB01>rst or second most
important. The next most common response was “Support for
Bicycling or Walking” (35%). Surprisingly, “Safety/Decreased Traf<U+FB01>c” 
(6%) and “Environmental Reasons/Pollution Reduction” (6%)
were not frequently chosen as the <U+FB01>rst most important bene<U+FB01>t.
Approximately one quarter (24%) of the parents said their
children walk or bicycle to school “Only for the special Safe Routes
to School Events” and over a third (41%) stated that a SR2S event at
some point in the past motivated their child to walk or bike to
school for the <U+FB01>rst time (the events have occurred since 2006).
Additionally, 47% of parents said that their child participated in a
walking school bus or bike train at an event.
Parents were asked to rate how much they agree or disagree
with certain statements about SR2S events. Fig. 2 summarizes the
results. Most of the parents agreed that the SR2S events enhanced
their child's behavior/motivation to walk or bike to school. Likewise, 
most agreed the SR2S events helped their child learn about
the bene<U+FB01>ts of walking or biking to school. A few parents (29%)

said the events helped introduce them or their children to new
walking and biking partners.
About half (47%) of the parents agreed that the SR2S events
increased their or their children's awareness about other walking
and biking routes (i.e. they discovered new routes or realized the
feasibility of a route), while the other half was neutral or disagreed
(see Fig. 2). About one-third agreed that the SR2S events increased
their willingness to let their child walk or bike to school, but most
were neutral (59%) and a one parent said they strongly disagreed.
A closer look at these responses reveals interesting insight; of
the parents who said their child only walks to school for SR2S
events, most (75%) agreed that the event increased their awareness 
of new routes (see Table 3). While on the other hand, most
(78%) of the parents who said their child regularly walks or bikes
to school were neutral. In other words, SR2S events have been a
learning experience, in terms of routes, for families that usually do
not walk to school, but not for families where the children already
walk to school regularly.
Likewise, Table 3 shows the effect on willingness to let a child
walk to school seems to depend on the frequency with which the
child walks to school. For parents with children who only walk or
bike on SR2S days, the majority (75%) believed the SR2S events
have had a neutral effect on their willingness to let them walk to
school. However, for parents with children who “sometimes” walk
or bike, most (67%) said the events increased their willingness to
let their child walk or bike to school. And for parents with children
who regularly walk to school, most (71%) gave a neutral response.
Perhaps, the SR2S events have the greatest effect on parents of
“sometimes” students because the “only for SR2S events” students
simply live too far away to walk more and “regularly” students will
walk anyway regardless of the SR2S efforts.

4.4. Parent and community leader phone interviews

In the phone interviews, to avoid general discussion about
general bene<U+FB01>ts from walking and bicycling, parents were asked
(among other things) to speci<U+FB01>cally identify bene<U+FB01>ts from the
SR2S events with careful focus on the day of the event. Some
parents said they could not think of anything beyond the general
bene<U+FB01>ts, such as health bene<U+FB01>ts or increased student alertness in
the classroom. A number of parents, however, offered insightful
observations. For example, one parent told the story of his
daughter who insisted he let her walk to school for the SR2S
event. To accommodate her wish, while recognizing the long
distance from their home, he decided to drive her part way and
let her walk the remaining distance. He said the experience
opened his eyes to the possibility of driving part way. He noted
it saved him from having to deal with traf<U+FB01>c near the school and
and biking events resulted in the following.”

provided a means for his daughter to get exercise. Another parent
said she discovered neighbors whom she had not realized could be
walking partners for her child. A few parents said walking with
their child on the day of the SR2S event helped them realize that
the walk “wasn't so bad.”
When asked how the designated days might be improved,
overwhelmingly the response was to expand the events for more
days—most parents said it should last for a whole week. A few
parents suggested the need for more information, such as maps
showing recommended routes and “kiss and walk” locations.
A walk or bike to school “practice day” to explore routes and
walking partners was proposed by one parent, who added that it
could be held on a Saturday so that working parents who
otherwise cannot participate could be involved.
The community leaders were also asked to focus on the
designated days for walking and bicycling. One common theme
that emerged from the interviews was the idea that the SR2S
events provide a fun, community-building activity. Typically on
the morning of the events, the Mayor, members of City Council,
police of<U+FB01>cers, and other interested citizens make a special effort
to be at the schools to cheer on the students. In the interviews,
most of the community leaders noted the jubilant atmosphere that
is created from the larger crowds of students and parents, big
colorful posters with words of encouragement, honking car horns,
and fun activities.
Furthermore, a few community leaders noted that the sheer
number of students walking and bicycling, combined with extra
attention and observation, helped them discover certain locations
where safety could be improved, such as otherwise un-noticed
street segments where sidewalks are missing and intersections
where providing crossing guards would be helpful. One school
principal said that while observing a SR2S event she and her staff
realized the bike racks should be moved to a different location to
better accommodate the students. Another school principal said
because of his observations during a SR2S event he and his staff have
decided to completely recon<U+FB01>gure the parking lot to change the <U+FB02>ow
of vehicle traf<U+FB01>c. He said they are currently reviewing different paint
striping layouts and signage to more safely direct vehicles.
A few community leaders said they think the SR2S events and
their underlying message have produced broader positive changes
across the city. One city council member noticed an increase in the
number of youth wearing helmets while riding bicycles even on
weekends. Another person said there was an increase in driver
awareness of students walking to school in certain areas.


5. Conclusion

The results from this case study illustrate some of the bene<U+FB01>ts
and perceived bene<U+FB01>ts from SR2S events that designate a day for
walking or bicycling. The analysis was only a snapshot for one
SR2S program, yet the <U+FB01>ndings revealed important trends. The
number of students walking or bicycling to school showed a 100%
increase on the day of the event. The numbers remained high a
few weeks after the event and interviews with parents con<U+FB01>rmed

that the spring event, which was held after the coldest winter
months, helped re-initiate walking and bicycling for the remainder
of the year. In other words, the spring event seemed to propel
students to start walking or bicycling to school a little earlier than
they might have otherwise. These trends were not observed at a
nearby control school that did not participate in the SR2S event.
The counts also showed a statistically signi<U+FB01>cant increase in the
number of parents escorting their children to school on the day of
the event. SR2S leaders should use the events as an opportunity to
advertise and encourage walking school buses. Likewise, SR2S
leaders and school administrators should use the events as an
opportunity to interact with parents and get feedback on all
aspects of SR2S as well as other important issues. SR2S leaders
can use the large crowds and intense observation to draw attention to
particular safety issues.
A few students said the SR2S event was the <U+FB01>rst time they had
ever walked or biked to school. SR2S leaders should continue to
encourage families that live far away to participate in some
manner, even if it means dropping their children off a few blocks
from the school. They should work with school and city of<U+FB01>cials to
identify and make maps for “kiss and walk” locations. Furthermore,
 the <U+FB01>ndings suggest the most success in changing behavior
might be achieved by targeting families where the children
“sometimes” walk to school.
In general, the surveys and interviews showed most parents,
students, and community leaders feel the SR2S events provide
important bene<U+FB01>ts. The most common bene<U+FB01>t mentioned was
improved health through active travel. Numerous studies have
shown there are in fact health bene<U+FB01>ts from walking and bicycling
(Pucher and Dijkstra, 2003; Mackett, 2013); however, it is dif<U+FB01>cult
to translate the <U+FB01>ndings from this case study into quanti<U+FB01>able
health bene<U+FB01>ts. In fact it is very dif<U+FB01>cult to put a dollar value on
most of the purported bene<U+FB01>ts from SR2S events. For example,
clearly there was a reduction in vehicle emissions and possibly
some congestion relief on the day of the events, but the monetary
value of those bene<U+FB01>ts is not readily clear. Likewise, there were a
number of ancillary bene<U+FB01>ts that are not easily quanti<U+FB01>ed. For
example, the city engineer and school principals said the events
helped identify and motivate safety improvements that may have
otherwise gone unnoticed.
It is perhaps even more dif<U+FB01>cult to try to quantify social
bene<U+FB01>ts from SR2S events. Much like a city's <U+FB01>reworks show, the
bene<U+FB01>ts from community-building events are not easily priced.
Furthermore, many of the bene<U+FB01>ts from SR2S events might not be
realized for many years into the future. Most parents said they felt
the events changed their child's motivation to walk to school and
it is very possible that the insight their child gained will guide
their behavior long into their adult lives. These long-term behavioral 
changes are very dif<U+FB01>cult to measure.
On the other hand, the costs are easier to quantify. For the case
study, the local SR2S coordinator estimates the cost for each event,
including her wage, advertising, prizes, and materials for fun
games, was about $230 per school, which calculates to about
$0.80 per student. If the purported bene<U+FB01>ts were to be calculated,
it is very probable that they would easily outweigh the costs.


Future research should be done to quantify the bene<U+FB01>ts from
SR2S activities and determine their dollar value. Perhaps longitudinal 
studies could be conducted to identify long lasting
impacts. Future research could also look closer at some of the
<U+FB01>ndings from this study. For example, is it safer for students to
walk in larger groups or might a group of students be less attentive
to vehicular traf<U+FB01>c? What is the best timing of an event to
encourage students to start walking again in the spring? What
are the most effective ways to advertise SR2S events and increase
participation?
The research design for this case study can serve as a model for
other evaluation efforts in the future. For example, practitioners
should seek to gather data through various means, namely
quantitative and qualitative observations, student surveys, parent
surveys, and interviews with stakeholders. We found that sometimes 
the various data sources supported each other, and other
times shed a different light on certain implications. Likewise, we
recommend identifying a “control” school when possible. Unfortunately, 
in our case study this was not considered for the fall
event. The research questions and the <U+FB01>ndings from this case
study can also guide practitioners in future evaluation efforts. For
example, practitioners might actively seek to evaluate the extent
of indirect bene<U+FB01>ts that are not necessarily intended, expected, or
obvious, such as increased insight about infrastructure needs or
increased face-to-face interaction between school administrators
and law enforcement.

