Independent mobility on the journey to school: A joint cross-sectional
and prospective exploration of social and physical environmental

Background: Despite related physical/mental health bene<U+FB01>ts, children0 s independent mobility for school
travel (i.e. walking/cycling without adult accompaniment) has declined in recent decades.
Purpose: To examine cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between social/physical environmental 
variables and independent mobility on the school journey.
Methods: Participants were 1121 9–10 year-olds residing within 1600 m of their school in urban/rural
areas of Norfolk, UK in 2007 (T1). At one year (T2) 491 children were followed-up. At T1, parents survey-reported 
perceptions of the social/physical environment and rules regarding their child0 s physical
activity. Characteristics of the neighborhood, route to school and school environment were measured
using a Geographical Information System and school audits. At both time-points children survey-reported 
their usual travel mode and whether accompanied. Regression analyses were conducted
in 2013.
Results: Around half walked/cycled to school without adult accompaniment (T1, 43%; T2, 53%). Parents
often allowing their child to play outside anywhere within the neighborhood (adjusted odds ratio (AOR)
3.14 (95% CI 1.24–7.96)) and household car access (AOR 0.27 (95% CI 0.08–0.94)) were associated
longitudinally with boys walking/cycling independently to school. Land use mix (AOR 1.38 (95% CI 1.06–
1.79)), proportion of main roads in the neighborhood (AOR 0.67 (95% CI 0.47–0.94)) and parental
encouragement for walking/cycling (AOR 0.40 (95% CI 0.20–0.80)) were associated longitudinally with
girls walking/cycling independently to school.
Conclusions: Interventions should develop parents0 skills to teach their children to be independently
mobile and to build con<U+FB01>dence regarding venturing out without parental accompaniment. Urban
planners should consider designing neighborhoods in which residences, business/retail outlets and
sports facilities are co-located to promote active transport.



1. Introduction                                                                              
												
Having identi<U+FB01>ed physical inactivity as a major risk factor for                         
global mortality, the World Health Organisation (WHO, 2010)                                  
recommends that school-aged children engage in at least one                                  
hour of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity daily. Nowadays,                              
children0 s leisure time is increasingly spent indoors, often using                          
electronic entertainment media (Karsten, 2005; Tandy, 1999).                                      
Therefore, strategies that promote physical activity among youth                             
are vital. One example is the promotion of active transport (e.g.                            
walking/cycling) to school, as this may encourage habitual physical                          
												
activity among school-aged children (Tudor-Locke et al., 2001).
Two comprehensive literature reviews of predominantly cross-sectional 
studies identi<U+FB01>ed that children who walk/cycle to school
are more physically active overall than those who travel by
motorized modes (Faulkner et al., 2009), and that this behavior
is associated with lean body composition and improved cardiorespiratory 
<U+FB01>tness (Lubans et al., 2011).
Independent mobility refers to children0 s freedom to move
around their neighborhood (or similar) without adult accompaniment 
(Hillman et al., 1990). Independent mobility whilst walking/
cycling to destinations within the local neighborhood (e.g. school,
shops) provides unsupervised opportunities for interaction
with the built (Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002) and natural environments 
(Bixler et al., 2002) and for development of spatial
and navigational skills (Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002). It may												                           									
be bene<U+FB01>cial also for building friendships (Prezza et al., 2001) and
a sense of community (Prezza and Pacilli, 2007). Despite these
bene<U+FB01>ts children0 s independent mobility for school travel has
declined in recent decades. For example, a study of English
schoolchildren (Hillman et al., 1990) reported that between 1971
and 1990 the proportion of seven-year-olds who traveled to school
without adult accompaniment declined from more than 70% to
less than 10%. A recent Australian study (Carver et al., 2012)
reported low rates ( o40%) of walking and cycling to school
without adult accompaniment among primary (elementary)
schoolchildren in urban areas, and even lower rates ( o 30%) in
rural areas.
According to socio-ecological modeling of health behaviors
(Sallis and Owen, 1997) there are multiple layers of in<U+FB02>uence of
intrapersonal, social and physical environment variables on an
individual0 s health behaviors. In line with the ecological model, it
appears that many children now have limited opportunities to
spend time outdoors independently due to parental concern about
neighborhood safety. Previous research suggests that social environmental factors such as parental concerns about road safety and
‘stranger danger’ are associated with lower levels of independent
mobility on the school commute (Hillman et al., 1990; Carver et al.,
2008). However there is a paucity of longitudinal research that
examines environmental predictors of change in independent
mobility. Following the rationale of Moudon and Lee (2003),
physical environmental variables that may in<U+FB02>uence independent
mobility on the school journey are the neighborhood surrounding
the child0 s home, the route to school, and the school environment.
However the relative importance of these environments is not
known. Hence, the aim of this study was to examine cross-sectional 
and longitudinal associations between a range of social
and physical environmental variables and independent mobility
on the journey to school among primary (i.e. elementary) school-children 
in Norfolk, UK.

2. Methods

2.1. Sample

Children0 s data were drawn from the Sport, Physical activity and Eating
behavior: Environmental Determinants in Young people (SPEEDY) study and the
recruitment methods have been published previously (van Sluijs et al., 2008;
Corder et al., 2010). Brie<U+FB02>y, at baseline (T1) 2064 children (response rate 57%) aged
9–10 years were recruited from 92 schools in urban and rural areas of Norfolk, UK.
Between April and July 2007 children completed a questionnaire at school, and
parents completed a questionnaire distributed in take-home packages. Children
were followed up by postal communication at one year (T2) between April and July
2008 (n ¼1019; response rate, 49%), when they completed a second questionnaire
while still at the same school. No follow-up information was collected from the
parents. There were no signi<U+FB01>cant differences in baseline physical activity levels
(Corder et al., 2010) or travel mode between participants and non-participants of

the follow-up study. At each time-point, parental consent was obtained prior to
data collection. Ethical approval was obtained from the University of East Anglia
research ethics committee.

2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Independent mobility on the school journey

At each time-point children reported how they usually traveled to school
(response options were: by car; bus/train; bicycle; or on foot) and with whom
(possible responses were: alone; with a brother/sister; a parent/other adult;
a friend; another person – children were asked to select all that applied). At

each time-point a dichotomous measure of independent mobility was de<U+FB01>ned to
indicate whether children walked/cycled without adult accompaniment and assigned
values of (0) ‘walked/cycled to school with adult accompaniment or
used a motorized travel mode’; (1) ‘no adult accompaniment when walking/cycling
to school’. Because the likelihood of using active transport decreases sharply
with increasing distance, there was examination only of those children who
could feasibly walk/cycle to school independently, de<U+FB01>ned as those residing

within 1600 m of their school (Timperio et al., 2004). Although independent mobility
was measured at each time-point, explanatory variables were measured only at T1.

2.2.2. Socio-demographic variables
Parents reported car ownership and their highest education level (a proxy for
socioeconomic position). This was collapsed into three categories: low (high school

leaving certi<U+FB01>cate or less); medium (vocational above high school); high (university
education or above). Children reported their sex, age, number of siblings and
bicycle ownership.

2.2.3. Objective environmental measures
Using a Geographical Information System (ESRI ArcGIS 9.2) and the Ordnance
Survey database Mastermap Address Layer 2, children0 s home addresses were
mapped. Area-level socioeconomic deprivation was measured using the English

Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD; Department of Communities and Local
Government, 2007) based on these addresses. Objective environmental measures
that were signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with active transport to school among these
children at T1 (Panter et al., 2010a) were examined as predictors of independent
mobility on active school journeys at each time-point. These measures are
described previously (Panter et al., 2010b), but brie<U+FB02>y are categorized as ‘neighbor-hood’, 
‘route (to school)’, and ‘school’ characteristics (Table 1). Each child0 s
neighborhood was de<U+FB01>ned as the area within an 800 m pedestrian network buffer
around their home, representing an area within 10 min walk. Characteristics of
routes to schools were examined within a 100 m buffer of the shortest route
between home and school. School characteristics were identi<U+FB01>ed by an on-foot

audit of facilities in the school grounds that may promote walking/cycling and by
surveying principals on their school policies towards active transport (Panter et al.,
2010a).

2.2.4. Perceptions of the social and physical environment
Survey measures of perceptions of the social and physical environment that
were signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with active transport to school among these children
at T1 (Panter et al., 2010b) were considered and are described in Table 2. Using

responses to seven parent0 s questionnaire items on perceptions of social cohesion
and trust, a sense of community score was computed (internal reliability:
Cronbach0 s a ¼0.90) (Panter et al., 2010b). Using child questionnaire responses
(1 ‘yes’; 0 ‘no’), the following were examined: whether the child was encouraged by
a friend or a parent to walk/cycle to school and whether they considered their

neighborhood safe for walking or playing alone during the day (Table 2).
A neighborhood walkability score was computed using responses to 24 items in
the parent0 s questionnaire on perceptions of how supportive their neighborhood
was for walking/cycling. For example, perceptions of road safety, street connectivity, 
availability of footpaths/bike trails were measured (internal reliability:
Cronbach0 s a ¼ 0.74) (Panter et al., 2010a). In addition, parents reported their level
of agreement (using a <U+FB01>ve-point Likert scale) with two items regarding traf<U+FB01>c and
safety concerns on the route to school (Panter et al., 2010a). Responses were
dichotomized: 1 ‘agree/strongly agree’; 0 ‘strongly disagree/disagree/neither’
(Table 2).

2.2.5. Parental rules regarding their child0 s physical activity

Parents were asked how often they or their partner (1) restricted their child
from walking/cycling to a friend0 s house and (2) allowed their child to play outside
anywhere within the neighborhood. Responses were dichotomized: 1 ‘often/very
often’; 0 ‘else (i.e. never/rarely/sometimes)’ (Table 2).



3. Data analyses

In 2013, independent mobility while walking/cycle on the
school journey was examined at each time-point. Chi-squared
tests of signi<U+FB01>cance were performed to examine signi<U+FB01>cant differences
in independent mobility on the school journey by sex of the
child. A series of bivariate logistic regression analyses examined
cross-sectional associations between each explanatory social and
physical environmental variable and the odds of independent
mobility on the school journey at T1. Data analyses were conducted 
in Stata (Stata, version 12.0) using the ‘cluster’ option to
allow for non-independence of children within the same school.
Analyses were strati<U+FB01>ed by sex as boys tend to be granted
independent mobility at an earlier age than girls (Hillman et al.,
1990). All variables that were signi<U+FB01>cantly associated (p o0.05)
with independent mobility at T1 were entered into a multiple
logistic regression model.
To examine social and physical environmental variables at
baseline as predictors of change in independent mobility, this
analysis strategy was repeated except that the outcome variable
was independent mobility on the school journey at T2, controlling
for independent mobility at T1. All analyses controlled for parental                        
education level, distance to school and urban/rural location.                               
Between T1 and T2, 20 (4%) children moved home. Analyses were                                    
repeated with these children excluded and the <U+FB01>nal results did not                          
differ substantially. Therefore results of analyses that include data                       
from these children are presented. None of the children moved
school.
In these analyses, predictors of independent mobility were
examined among children walking and cycling to school as well as
those being taken by motorized transport. In order to examine
whether these predictors of independent mobility differed in the
walking and cycling group compared to the overall sample,
regression modeling was repeated amongst this subset of active
travelers.

4. Results

4.1. Sample

Overall, 1121 (54% of the original sample) children aged 9–10
years resided within 1600 m of their school at T1. Almost half
(43%) were boys. The median number of siblings was 2 (range
0–8). Parents0 education levels (T1) were spread fairly evenly: low,
28%; medium, 36%; high, 36%. Most households (88%) had access
to a car, and over half (54%) had access to multiple cars. Almost all
children (94%) owned a bicycle. One-year follow-up data were
analyzed for 491 children (44% of the baseline analysis sample).
Compared with those who participated at T1 only, the follow-up
group had slightly lower proportions of boys (39% vs. 46%,
p ¼0.023), higher rates of bike ownership (96% vs. 92%,
p ¼0.008) and their households had higher rates of access to
multiple cars (57% vs. 51%, p ¼0.020). However, there was no
signi<U+FB01>cant difference (p ¼0.657) in parents0 education levels: 37%
of parents in the follow-up group reported attaining a high level of
(i.e. tertiary) education while 34% of parents who participated only
at T1 reported this. Similarly there was no signi<U+FB01>cant difference
(p ¼0.069) in the number of siblings: 49% of participants in the
follow-up group compared with 55% of those who participated
only at baseline had two or more siblings.

4.2. Independent mobility on active journeys to school

Travel modes and accompaniment levels on the journey to
school are presented in Table 3. At T1 almost three quarters (74%)
of those residing within 1600 m of school either walked (62%) or
cycled there (12%), but less than half (43%) did so without adult
accompaniment. Overall, the rate of independent mobility on
active journeys to school increased to 53% at T2, mainly due to
increases in walking without adult accompaniment. Compared
with girls, a signi<U+FB01>cantly higher (p o0.05) proportion of boys
walked/cycled independently to school at T1, but at T2 the
proportions of boys and girls doing so were not signi<U+FB01>cantly
different. Between T1 and T2, 17% of children took up walking/

cycling independently to school, while 6% stopped traveling in this
way (3% continued to use active transport but did so with adult
accompaniment; 3% switched from active transport to car travel).
Overall 36% of children walked/cycled independently to school at
both time-points, while 40% did so at neither time-point.
4.3. Cross-sectional associations with independent active transport
at T1

The results of logistic regression analyses examining associations 
between explanatory variables described above and the odds
of the child walking/cycling independently to school at T1 are
presented in Table 4. Results are presented for the whole sample
(i.e. including those who used motorized travel) because in
comparison there was little difference in these associations
amongst those who walked or cycled to school. More explanatory
variables were associated with the odds of boys rather than girls
walking/cycling independently to school. However, boys and girls
were less likely to walk/cycle independently if their parents were
concerned about traf<U+FB01>c or worried about something happening to
their child on the school journey. In contrast, those with more
siblings and whose parents considered it safe to play outside
during daytime were more likely to walk/cycle independently.
Only one objective measure of the environment, the effective
walkable area (four categories based on a quartile split), was
associated (negatively) with independent mobility on the school
journey at T1, but only for boys. In other words, relative to the
lowest category of effective walkable area, each increasing category 
was associated with reduced odds of boys walking/cycling
independently to school at T1. However, boys who were often
allowed to play anywhere within their neighborhood were more
likely to walk/cycle independently to school at T1, compared with
those with more restricted boundaries (Table 4).

4.4. Prospective associations with change in independent active
transport between T1 and T2

At T2, in the multivariable regression model (Table 5) only one
baseline variable was associated longitudinally with increased
odds of boys walking/cycling independently to school: parents
often allowing their child to play outside anywhere within the
neighborhood; and one further variable, household access to a car,
was associated with decreased odds of this. Only one variable, land
use mix, was positively associated longitudinally with girls walking/cycling 
independently to school, while two further variables
were negatively associated with girls doing so: the proportion of
main roads in the neighborhood; and parental encouragement for
walking/cycling to school (Table 5).

5. Discussion

Despite growing interest in children0 s independent mobility
and its positive associations with physical activity (Schoeppe et al.,
2013), limited research exists on social and physical environmental
factors that may in<U+FB02>uence children0 s independent mobility to
school. In particular, most related studies are cross-sectional, thus
precluding causal inference. For example, a Taiwanese study
reported that density of trees providing shade and prevalence of
footpaths were associated with children walking to school without
adult accompaniment, while intersection density was inversely
3associated with this (Lin and Chang, 2010). Most studies of
environmental factors related to children0 s school journeys have
examined travel mode (e.g. active transport vs. motorized modes)
rather than whether the child walked/cycled independently (Mitra,


In literature on children0 s independent mobility, the parent is                          
considered literally as a ‘gatekeeper’ who controls their children0 s                          
mobility outside the home through the granting of ‘mobility                                    
licenses’ (e.g. allowing them to cross roads alone) (Hillman et al.,                           
1990). While interest has grown in aspects of the parent–child                                 
interaction that determine whether the school journey is made                                  

independently, pathways that lead to independent mobility on the
school journey are under-researched (Mitra, 2013). A framework
proposed recently by Mitra (2013) posits that family members
determine the travel mode to school and whether the journey is
made independently based on: perceived importance of escorting
the child; mobility choices (e.g. car access) and restrictions (e.g.

the parent0 s work commute). Furthermore the framework identi<U+FB01>es 
<U+FB01>ve domains of in<U+FB02>uence on travel mode and on independent
mobility to school: (1) distance to school; (2) safety concerns
(traf<U+FB01>c; personal); (3) street connectivity; (4) pedestrian facilities
and esthetics; (5) social connectedness. While the current study
does not directly test Mitra0 s framework (2013), aspects of all
domains are examined in relation to children0 s independent
mobility to school.
This is among the <U+FB01>rst longitudinal studies to examine social
and physical environmental factors that may be associated with
changes in children0 s independent mobility to school. Despite
residing within an appropriate walking distance (Timperio et al.,
2004), less than half of the children walked/cycled independently
to school. Consistent with earlier research (Hillman et al., 1990;
Prezza et al., 2001) boys compared with girls had higher rates of
independent mobility but this difference narrowed as they grew
older. Baseline <U+FB01>ndings demonstrate that, overall, social environmental 
variables and perceptions of the neighborhood were
associated more frequently with children walking/cycling to
school without adult accompaniment than were objective measures 
of the physical environment. However, the discussion shall
focus on the novel longitudinal component of this study.
Only one variable was associated longitudinally with increased
odds of boys0 walking/cycling independently to school: being
allowed by their parents to play outside within their neighborhood
more often. This variable was also associated cross-sectionally
with boys0 independent mobility to school and may be indicative
of boys0 broader independent mobility at an earlier age than girls
(Hillman et al., 1990; Prezza et al., 2001). For girls, greater land use
mix in the neighborhood (suggesting co-location of residences,
business/retail outlets, sports facilities) was associated longitudinally 
with increased odds of walking/cycling independently to
school. While the location of walkable destinations near home
has been shown to promote active transport among adolescents,
the association with children0 s independent mobility is less clear
(Giles-Corti et al., 2009).
For girls, the proportion of main roads within their neighborhood 
was associated longitudinally with reduced odds of walking/
cycling independently to school. Perceptions of busy roads may
have contributed to concern about traf<U+FB01>c which is a key barrier to
children0 s independent active transport (Carver et al., 2008). There
is evidence that from early childhood, girls are encouraged by their
parents to take fewer risks than are boys (Morrongiello and
Dawber, 1999), so traf<U+FB01>c concerns may provide a greater deterrent
to girls0 walking/cycling. Parental encouragement of girls0 walking/
cycling to school was negatively associated with doing so independently. 
While this association was not in the expected direction, it is possible that parents who were concerned about their
daughters0 inactivity were encouraging them to walk/cycle more,
and in some cases accompanied them. For example, among 35
girls who were encouraged by their parents to walk/cycle to school
but traveled there by car at T1, 14 had switched to walking at T2:
eight were accompanied by a parent while six walked independently. 
Encouragement of girls0 physical activity as they become
older is of great importance as age-related declines in adolescent
girls0 physical activity levels are well-documented (Kimm et al.,
2005; van Mechelen, 2000).
It should be noted that since features of the objective physical
environment were not measured at T2 it was not possible to assess
whether the environment had changed between T1 and T2. Any
changes may have contributed to change in independent mobility
to school. However, our sample was drawn from a large geographic 
area, and substantial changes in the physical environment
(e.g. to the road network or land use mix) will not be common
over a short follow up period (12 months). They are hence unlikely
to explain much of the change in independent mobility in this

study. It may be however that parents0 perceptions of the environment 
and demographic characteristics such as household car
access, which were not re-measured at T2, may change over a
short time, and this is recognized as a limitation.
In these analyses, predictors of independent mobility were
examined among children who used active transport to school as
well as those who used motorized transport. In the case of
children currently being driven, interventions to increase the
prevalence of independent mobility on the school commute will
need to achieve modal shift to an active form of transport in
addition to a switch from an accompanied to unaccompanied
journey. Compared with results for the whole sample presented in
this paper, few differences were found in how characteristics of
the neighborhood, school and route to school were associated with
independent travel amongst these walkers and cyclists. The main
differences were that perceptions of the neighborhood and social
support were no longer associated with the odds of independent
mobility. Since these variables were shown previously to be
associated with travel mode to school (Panter et al., 2010b), this
is unsurprising.
A major strength of this study is the inclusion of data gathered
using seasonally-matched surveys of parents and their children
attending primary schools in urban and rural areas. However,
recruitment of children from one county in England during one
season may limit the generalizability of <U+FB01>ndings nationally and
internationally. While the low retention rate and narrow age-range 
of participating children, reliance on their self-report and
assumption of the routes to school (which may not correspond to
actual routes taken) are acknowledged as limitations, a further
strength is the inclusion of objective measures and perceptions of
the environment in the child0 s neighborhood, on the route to
school and in the school environment.


6. Conclusions

Despite relatively high rates of walking and cycling (Carver
et al., 2012; McDonald, 2007) only around half of the children
walked/cycled without adult accompaniment. Interventions
increasing independent mobility are required. As well as offering
potential to increase children0 s physical activity and provide
related health bene<U+FB01>ts through active transport, such interventions 
can also promote children0 s social, cognitive and emotional
development via their walking/cycling without adult accompaniment 
(Kyttä, 2004). These <U+FB01>ndings suggest that it may be worthwhile 
for interventions to develop parents0 skills in order to teach
their children to be independently mobile and to build parents0
and children0 s con<U+FB01>dence to venture out without parental accompaniment. 
In addition, urban planners should consider designing
neighborhoods in which residences, business/retail outlets and
sports facilities are co-located to promote active transport among
youth, as well as among the broader population (National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence, 2013).


