Children’s Independent Trips on Weekdays and Weekends: Case Study of Quebec City                                                                         

Abstract
Children’s independent mobility (CIM) on school days (weekdays) and on the weekend are examined in this study. Previous
studies have focused primarily on weekday trips, with a vast majority only examining trips to school. However, the types of
trips and the available time differ between weekdays and weekends. Weekday trips are more regular and possibly more local,
whereas on the weekend the children may have more free time (i.e., no school) to engage in activities. Parents (as a group)
are also less likely to have work obligations, and thus potentially more time, on the weekend. Theoretically, each context for
the weekend could facilitate more independent or active mode trips. Nonetheless, this may be linked to whether destinations
are local, which is linked to the built environment. Using origin–destination data (2011) for the City of Que´bec, this paper will
expand knowledge in the field of children’s travel by examining all trips during a weekday (n = 979) and weekend (n = 315)
for children aged 9 to 11 across five built environment types. The findings show that weekend trips are rarely independent,
and that the key explanatory factors for greater CIM are shorter distances, having an older sibling, and more urban environments. 
Other sociodemographic variables were not significant or were inconsistent between the two types of weekday.

During the past few years, a notable decrease in children’s 
active and independent travel (or mobility) has             
been observed (e.g., 1–4), and terms such as ‘‘immobility’’         
and ‘‘inactivity’’ are more and more present when children’s 
travel is discussed (5, 6). Children’s travel is markedly 
different from that of their parents, in part because
of the differences in autonomy (e.g., 7). Children’s independent 
mobility (CIM) is important because of how it               
affects children’s well-being, whether that be the physical,        
psychological, economic, cognitive, or social domains
(8). As a result of this importance, many studies can be            
found on children’s independent travel (see 9), but most            
studies have focused on weekday trips to school. Some               
previous studies have asked parents about their children’s          
CIM for weekday and weekend (10), but few studies have              
directly examined CIM for these two parts of the week in            
the same context (11). In this study, independent trips by          
children aged 9 to 11 are estimated for weekday and for             
weekend travel.                                                     
Previous literature has highlighted numerous factors
that influence CIM, including individual, household, and             
built environment contexts (i.e., 9). Individual characteristics 
of children could play a role such as their age or           
their sex. Household characteristics of the children may           
also have an influence such as the level of income, the             

number of cars, and family composition. As well, the
built environment is often found to affect CIM.
Therefore, for this study CIM is examined with respect
to variables related to the child, the household, and the
built environment of their residence.

CIM: Trends and Influences on Lived Experiences
In this study, CIM has been defined as ‘‘the freedom of
children to travel around their own neighbourhood or
city without adult supervision’’ (12). Thus, for this study
CIM comprises trips without adults who are responsible
for the child arriving at their destination. As such, a public 
bus trip is considered independent (the child is responsible for getting off at the correct location), but a trip in
a school bus is not as it is the responsibility of the bus
driver to drop the children off. Children traveling with

other children, including siblings, are considered to be
conducting independent trips here, so the term could be
refined to ‘‘independent from adults,’’ which is similar to
other previous work (13). In other words, it is the child
who is free to walk and cycle without the supervision of
an adult. In such a trip, children are more responsible
for their own mobility, which requires numerous decisions 
(see 14).
One framework for understanding CIM is the socioecological 
model, which has been used in public health for
several years (e.g., 15). In that framework, CIM is understood 
to be influenced by factors ranging from individual
and family characteristics, through to neighborhood built
environment, policy, and cultural influences. A good
review of these different influences for children’s active
and independent travel can be seen in Mitra, who proposes 
a behavioral model of school transportation that
reflects these influences (9). Generally, with age, children’s 
independence increases, and often boys are more
independent (9). However, for the right to go alone, gender 
may play less of a role (16). Increasing income and
increasing car ownership are often found to decrease
independence (9), though this may be linked to the built
environment (17). Finally, culture will likely be a factor,
as different expectations exist for independent travel (18).
This section focuses primarily on how independent travel
relates to children’s lives and current trends. In the discussion 
section, the findings are discussed with respect to
related research outcomes.
Few children have unrestricted mobility in their urban
environment, which limits their exploration of their local
living environment, and their ability to meet and play
with other children in open spaces without the constant
supervision of adults (19). A lack of mobility may be seen
as a stigma of always being and remaining within the
same territory. From a cognitive point of view, it may
represent for children a notion of ‘‘routine,’’ to be locked
in a known, marked-out space. If children’s mobility is
too restrained, they could lose out on experiences, have
reduced neighborhood knowledge, and have a smaller
range of activities (spatial and variety) (e.g., 20). This
limitation can be seen in children’s spatial maps of their
neighborhoods (21). Further to exploration, independent
travel is linked with seeing known people while traveling
(22). Also, when children do not travel by active modes,
their overall physical activity is lower, because trips by
active mode could represent one of the principal sources
of physical activity for some children (23, 24).
For some years now, studies have shown that children’s 
active and independent travel is decreasing in
many developed countries. In I^le-de-France (the greater
metropolitan area of Paris), almost 40% of the weekly
mobility for 11-year-old children was accompanied (25).
In Japan, for all children under 18 years old, walking

and cycling on weekdays can nationally be seen to have
decreased from 78% of all trips in 1989 to 69% in 2010
(26). For the national data in Japan, weekend trips by
active modes are shown to be lower, with 60% in 1989
and 30% in 2010 (26). This would suggest that perhaps
independent travel on weekends is lower, though it was
not clear from that study.
In London, England, over a 19-year period (1971 to
1990), the percentage of independent trips decreased considerably. 
Larger decreases were observed for 9-year-olds
than for children slightly older (1). In the United States,
McDonald reported a significant reduction in active
transport to school between 1969 and 2001 (27). In
Canada, Buliung et al. reported that for Toronto there
was a reduction of over 10% of walking trips to school
for children aged 11 to 13 between 1986 and 2006 (3).
Few studies apart from Hillman et al.’s work have quantified 
CIM (as opposed to walking or active trips to
school) over a long period of time and most studies have
focused on trips to school (as such data are more abundant) 
(1). Thus, the state of knowledge suggests that it is
not known how children’s independent travel differs
between weekend and weekday travel, nor whether the
other factors would consistently influence such trips.

Why Encourage Independent Trips?

Active and independent travel relates to numerous benefits
for children. From a sustainability perspective, children’s
mobility is important because it influences social, environmental, 
and economic components of their lives. The
autonomous mobility of children relates to the sustainable
development of the city by reducing vehicle traffic, but also
to well-being (8). Finally, being allowed to travel independently 
is linked directly to children’s travel satisfaction,
and through that to their life satisfaction (28).
CIM relates to overall physical activity, but it probably 
influences several aspects of children’s cognitive
development and social interactions (29). If a child is not
able to benefit from opportunities of independence, their
horizons may be reduced and they may find themselves
in difficulties when they are no longer protected (1).
Independent children experience and manage danger,
which allows for their cognitive development (14).
Restricting the child’s autonomy could negatively influence 
their development with reference to their local connections 
(22, 30), and reduce their social interactions (1,
19). Moreover, independent travel allows children to
develop their environmental intelligence (through urban
exploring [21, 31, 32]). Through such exploration, children 
will have a greater knowledge of their urban environment 
than children transported by cars (33).
Therefore, CIM is reducing, which may have negative
consequences on children’s health and well-being. For

active travel and other physical health activities, researchers 
from public health have often used the socioecological
framework (e.g., 15). Such a framework suggests CIM
must not only be understood as related to the child and
his or her family, but also to the built environment and
culture within which he or she exists. Mitra proposes a
behavioral model for school transportation that incorporates 
those different influences of individual, household,
and the built environment (9). Here, the concept is
applied to all trips by children. However, the context of
such travel will also vary from weekdays to weekends,
but this has not been well studied. Thus, the objective of
this study is to understand how, in the same cultural context 
(Que´bec, Canada), CIM might vary from weekdays
to weekends.

Methodology

Study Area

The area of this study is the metropolitan community of
Que´bec. Children in the Que´bec City area are highly
dependent on motorized transport, particularly motor
vehicles (34). Que´bec City contains an older center with
‘‘rings’’ of development that are progressively less urbanized. 
The center was mostly developed before the invention 
of cars, and the streets are relatively narrow and the
land use is mixed. The first ‘‘ring’’ (or ‘‘crown’’ in the
local terminology) is mixed residential development, followed 
by suburban development with an urban design
that changes from linear blocks to curvy roads in more
recent residential areas. The city also contains the largest
number of inner-city highways in Canada, although at
the same time having a bus system that (at the time of
the study) included three high-frequency bus lines with
designated lanes (during peak hour). The city has a low
density, as can be seen in Table 1, but there is variation
in the built environment (Table 2). For clarity, ‘‘School
Day’’ will be used in place of weekday.


Data Used in the Study

This study uses the 2011 Que´bec Metropolitan
Community (CMQ in French; for more detail on the
data visit: www.transports.gouv.qc.ca/fr/salle-de-presse/
nouvelles/Pages/enquete-origine-destination.aspx) (35)
Origin–Destination data, which are administered by the
provincial Ministry of Transport. These data aim to capture 
all household trips made on the previous day. The
2011 survey included 26,441 households (roughly 7.2%
of all households) and was administered by telephone.
Trips by children are typically reported by an adult, so
there exists the possibility that independent trips are
underreported. The data are weighted based on census
data to accurately represent the population of

neighborhoods. Trips with a distance greater than the
95 percentile were removed.
The purpose of this study is to better understand the
mobility behavior of 9- to 11-year-old children, as this is
commonly the age range when children in Anglo-Saxon
countries begin to have greater independent travel. This
research improves on current knowledge by exploring the
question of autonomy for trips made on both weekdays
and the weekend.


Study Sample

General statistics of the sample for this study are shown
in Table 1. Statistical differences for the two samples of
weekday and weekend trips are the number of people
residing in the household and household car ownership.
There are differences with respect to income ranges,
although the averages are not statistically different. The
weekday sample has a higher percentage of the richest
group, but the weekend sample has a greater percentage
of the mid-to-high groups.
There is no ‘‘independent’’ trip variable in the data set.
As such, an algorithm was created for identifying such
trips. Any trip in which an adult is not responsible for the
child arriving or getting off at the stop is considered to be
an independent trip. Thus, a school bus trip, although
not ‘‘escorted,’’ does not require the student to pay attention 
and get off at the correct stop as the driver takes
responsibility. Although a teenager (16 years or older)

could drive a child somewhere, and therefore it is ‘‘adult
free,’’ it is not possible for the child to independently use
this mode (though they could use a ride hail or taxi, but
these trips were not evident in the data set). Finally, a trip
by an active mode could still be escorted, so any trip in
which the child and adult left at the same time by the
same mode was considered an escorted mode.
Autonomous trip rates are quite different between the
weekday (48%) and the weekend (13%) (Table 1).
Consequently, children are found to be less independent
during the weekend despite the likelihood of more ‘‘free’’
time (i.e., no school or work obligations).

Built Environment Aspect. The built environment (Table 2)
is added to the data according to a neighborhood classification 
developed previously. This classification is based
on 17 different measures of the built environment related
to transport (37). Most of the children live in the least
urban areas of ‘‘periphery’’ and ‘‘outlying rural.’’ They
represent 76% (weekday) and 73% (weekend) of the children 
in the sample.

Analysis and Results
The focus of this study is independent trips for young
children. Potential influences that are possible to analyze
with this data include age, gender, household income,
number of persons in the household, and household car
ownership. As the home location is also known, the data
were matched with the built environment types (Table 2).
As the dependent variable is a binary (i.e., an independent 
trip or not), binary logistic regression was conducted
with the statistical program Stata 14.2.

Variables Created
Several variables were created to improve the analysis. The
total number of adults in the household was estimated by
summing all individuals over the age of 18. The total number 
of older siblings was added by summing the number of
individuals between the ages of 12 and 25 (the assumption
here is that it is unlikely that a parent would be 16 years
older than a 9-year-old child, though possible). The total
number of siblings of the same age range (9- to 11-year-olds) 
was added by summing all children of that age minus
one (i.e., if there are two children aged 9 to 11, then there
is only one sibling to each child in that age range).
The Euclidian distance was included for all trips. The
distance was calculated with the geographical coordinates 
of the start and end points of the trip. The role of
‘‘reasonable’’ walking and cycling distances was also
examined. This is estimated by taking the 80% threshold
of all walking or cycling trips by the target group (i.e.,
9- to 11-year-olds; see 38). During the weekday, this distance 
is about 0.64 Km (walk) and 0.83 Km (bike) for 9-to 11-year-old 
children. Then for the weekend, it seems
that children are making longer trips in which the reasonable 
distance thresholds are 1.71 Km (on foot) and
1.83 Km (by bike).


Results
The results of the two binary regressions can be seen in
Table 3. Each group of influences (i.e., child, household,
built environment) is discussed in turn. Household
income and the number of adults could be removed from
these analyses without affecting the results; they were
retained as they were found to be significant in previous
studies.

Influence of the Child’s Demographic Characteristics. For age,
on weekdays, children aged 10 are 1.39 times (or 39%)
more likely to travel independently than 9-year-olds.
Eleven-year-olds are almost three times (2.83) more likely
to make independent trips than 9-year-olds on weekdays.
Thus, for this context, the older the child is, the more
independent they become for their trips.
On the weekend, results are the inverse. Here, it was
found that the 10-year-old children were 4.8 (1/0.21)
times less likely to be independent than 9-year-olds
(Table 3). The result for 11-year-olds (two times less
likely) was not significant. Therefore, it would seem


that the younger children were more independent for
the weekend.
No statistical difference was found for the role of gender 
for weekday trips. So, for this context, boys and girls
had the same level of independence for trips. However,
for the weekend, girls were more than twice as likely to
travel independently (Table 3).
Consequently, for both age and gender, the results
were not consistent, nor were they necessarily what was
anticipated from other literature because on the weekend
younger children were more independent and girls were
more independent than boys.

Household Influences. Household factors have been found
to play a role in children’s travel. Several measures were
tested: household income; household car ownership; the
overall number of people in the household; the number
of adults; the number of siblings over age 12; and the
number of siblings aged between 9 and 11.
Household income was not statistically significant for
either data set. Nevertheless, for the weekend, it might
be the size of the data set that limits the statistical significance 
because large descriptive differences can be seen in
Table 3.

The influence of the number of cars in the household
is examined. Compared with a household without a car,
children in households with three cars were nearly three
times less likely (1/0.38) to travel independently on weekdays 
(Table 3). On the weekend, the number of cars did
not have a statistical influence on the CIM. The general
tendency would suggest that more cars resulted in fewer
independent trips.
The number of people within the household and their
role (parent, sibling) could have an impact on the level of
independent travel. For weekday trips only, as the number 
of people within the household increases, children
were 1.30 (1/0.77) times less autonomous. For the number 
of adults, no statistical difference was found. So, for
the sample, no matter how many adults in the household, 
children were no more or less autonomous for their
mobility.

The number of older siblings in the household had an
impact on the autonomous traveling of the children. The
influence was found to be positive, with trips on the
weekday being 2.52 times more likely and on
the weekend 2.32 times more likely to be independent
(Table 3).
With regard to siblings of the same age, 9- to 11-year-
olds, the results are not consistent. On weekdays it was a
positive influence (2.02 times more autonomous).
However, for the weekend, the influence might be the
inverse, though there was no statistical difference.


Impact of External Factors on Children’s Mobility. The local
built environment of the child’s residence was taken into
account as this has been shown to influence independent
travel. Five built environment types were previously identified 
and estimated for the study area (Table 2): the center; 
the old suburbs; the new suburbs; the periphery; and
the outlying areas.
The influence of the built environment was clearer and
larger on the weekend. On the weekend, only the old suburbs 
were not statistically different to the old center for
children’s independent travel. For the size of the influence, 
all measures relate to children living in the center:
children in the new suburbs were four times less autonomous; 
in the periphery and outlying rural built

environments, children were nearly six times less autonomous. 
Thus, in general, the less built-up the area, the less
independent the child.
On weekdays, the new suburbs and the periphery were
nearly two times less likely to result in independent trips.
The non-significant result for the outlying rural area may
be because of villages still having walkable distances to
school.
The distance to a destination was found to be the
strongest explanatory factor. If only the distance variable
is used as an explanatory factor, the pseudo-R2 is still
0.34 for the weekday and 0.45 for the weekend (analysis
not shown here). The greater the distance, the less independent 
the trips. For the weekday, even for trips of 500
to 640 m, children are 1.67 times less independent than
those who make journeys of under 500 m. Once the distance 
passes 1 Km, the proportion of autonomous trips
decreases sharply. For trips between 1 and 1.99 Km, children 
are 33 times (1/.03) less independent than those who
make journeys under 500 m. Moreover, for a distance
over 2 Km, children were 100 times less independent.
Results are similar for weekend travel. For a distance
of 500 to 990 m, children are 14.3 (1/.07) times more
dependent for their trips than those who make journeys
under 500 m. The highest level of dependence is for distances 
over 2.5 Km where children are over 300 times
more likely to be accompanied for their trips. For 1 to
1.49 Km, children are 50 times less likely to be autonomous. 
Therefore, the greater the distance of the trip, the
more likely the child will be accompanied. For the weekend, 
trips over 3 Km were not independent.


Discussion

This study examined independent mobility for children
aged 9 to 11 for both weekday and weekend trips. The
results show that independence significantly drops on the
weekend, which is in line with other work in Que´bec (39)
and in a different culture, Japan (11). This drop in independent 
trips could be related to several factors, including 
social practices such as families spending more time
together on the weekend, children’s free time being occupied 
by activities outside of their neighborhood, infrequent 
trips in which the child might not know how to get
there, or numerous other possibilities. The topic requires
more study, including qualitative research, to explore
such potential causes.
Few explanatory variables were consistent across both
data sets. Those that were included having an older sibling, 
the built environment, and distance. The results are
first interpreted with respect to previous findings before
a short discussion on the implications.
Age had a logical relationship for the weekday trips
following previous research (e.g., 1 and 40). However,


this was not the case for the weekend. Why this might be
could relate to the older children being more involved in
organized activities. Previous studies that looked at age
typically focused on ‘‘licenses’’ for CIM (1, 40, 41), which
would not determine whether they actually practiced an
independent trip or not, or the studies only included
school related trips (e.g., 42).
Gender had no impact on the weekday, which mirrored 
previous research in Que´bec (43). For an international 
study, for most of the countries there was no
difference between genders with reference to their licenses
to travel independently (16). Nevertheless, this does differ 
from a UK study (44) and an Australian one (45). In
our study, girls were found to be more independent on
the weekend. This combination of results matches the
only other previous study, in Japan, of all children’s trips
of the same age group for both weekday and weekend
trips (11). For the studies that found a gender role different 
from this study, a few differences can be observed.
First, those studies were only for weekday travel and
were in northern Europe (46, 47), though another was in
Toronto, Canada (48). It is unknown what the case
might be for weekend travel in those countries.
Household income was not found to be significant,
which is in line with a previous study on parents accompanying 
children in Que´bec (39) but contrasted with several 
other studies on children’s active travel from
English-speaking countries (e.g., 49), but also with a
study on CIM from Belgium (50). However, the study on
CIM was for children aged 10 to 13 years old and only
during school trips (primary and secondary).
Car ownership was only loosely related to a decrease
in independent travel, thus it supports some previous
findings (51), but contrasted the association found in a
similar study in Japan (17). It may be that overall car
ownership levels in the Canadian context was higher. A
review on children’s active travel (not perfectly equivalent 
to CIM) also found mixed results for the influence
of car ownership (49). Car ownership may act as a proxy
for the need for higher mobility related to residential
choice (e.g., 52, 53), but could also be related to cohort
attitudes toward car use (e.g., 54).
The number of people in the household reduced independent 
trips for the weekday, but this was not explained
by the number of adults in the household. In fact, the
number of adults did not influence independent trips,
which contrasts with a study from Montreal (55).
Considering that adults, older siblings, and same age-group 
siblings were controlled for, this may be the influence 
of younger siblings. In some cases in Que´bec,
schools do not allow older siblings to escort siblings who
are under 6 years old. Thus, a parent would need to
escort at least the younger children, and the older ones
may just leave at the same time.

As mentioned, older siblings were found to be consistently 
and positively associated with independent trips,
which supports previous work (56, 57). This might be
because parents allow children to travel with older siblings 
because they have greater maturity and experience
with respect to traffic, it could be a matter of learning
how to get around from those older siblings, or it could
be time limitations that require that some children travel
independently (whereas others are escorted).
Finally, there is the influence of the built environment
and distance, which plays a strong role. Those results are
in line with results on children’s active travel (49). In our
sample, any trips over 1 Km (Euclidian distance) were
very unlikely to be independent, suggesting that children
of this age are relatively constrained to their immediate
environments. It is not clear whether the slightly longer
distances on the weekends are related to destinations
being on average further than school trips. As for the
built environment, the more urbanized the area, the
more children were independent, which corresponds with
results for other cultures (11). A special case was noted
for the outlying rural areas. On the weekday, there was
no difference from the urban core (statistically no difference 
and the odds ratio was essentially equivalent), but
on the weekend, it was roughly five times less independent. 
The weekday trips in such areas are mostly related
to school travel, which may still be local, whereas weekend 
trips may be to destinations that are too far, too
dangerous (e.g., crossing highways or other high-speed
roads), or where the parents prefer to drive (e.g., 58).
Of course, not all factors that influence CIM were
included in this study. For example, the parent’s (or
guardian’s) beliefs with respect to danger (traffic, ‘‘stranger danger’’) 
could be a factor. A study in Sweden on
children aged 8 to 11 years old aimed to determine which
parental factors and environmental factors have an
impact on the modal choice of children for their organized 
leisure activities (59). Parents referred to their trips
as ‘‘cab trips.’’ This behavior was linked with environmental 
factors (traffic, quality of sidewalks and bike
lanes, number of cars in the household), but also parents’
attitudes to independent mobility such as the maturity of
their children and to parental factors (confidence in
child, a desire to protect, or the presence of older children 
in the household). In English-speaking countries,
results are mixed, but most findings are that concern
over traffic safety does not play a significant role (49). In
that review, ethnicity played a role, but not always (49).
A positive relationship between more urban (i.e.,
dense, mixed) built environments and independent mobility 
has been shown in this study, among others. This
relationship could be explained by the design of new residential 
environments (here, new suburbs, periphery, and
outlying area), whereas in comparison with the older

neighborhoods, they generally lack sidewalks and local
amenities, have lower connectivity, and have higher traffic 
speeds (or roads that allow for such). All of these elements 
could reduce CIM for 9- to 11-year-old children,
suggesting that such areas are not conducive to children’s
independence and the associated advantages for their
well-being.
CIM is correlated positively with all domains of children’s 
well-being, yet it is increasingly rare. Previous
research mostly focused on weekday travel. On weekends, 
parents and children have fewer obligatory trips
such as work (for most adults) or school, and here we
find that independent trips diminish. The strongest explanatory 
variable is distance for both weekdays and weekends. 
A massive drop occurs at 1 Km, where trips are
between 32 times (weekday) and 50 times (weekend) less
likely to be independent. The large difference between the
weekday and weekend for the overall percentage of independent 
trips may relate to where destinations for children 
(and their family) are located. If a policy approach
increases the agglomeration of destinations into larger
centers, then distances will increase, increasing dependence 
on parents and transferring the costs from the destinations 
to the individuals, creating more traffic at the
same time (which is a public cost). Smaller and more
local destinations may help protect or increase children’s
independence, and at the same time reduce time stress on
parents, and reduce overall traffic. All these changes are
associated with better health outcomes (e.g., 60).
For future studies, it was found that the weekend differed 
considerably from the weekday, but the weekend
trips are rarely studied. Are the low levels of autonomy
related to cultural practice or a lack of local amenities
for weekend activities? Previous research on children’s
active travel has found a positive correlation with local
recreational destinations (49). The quality and quantity
of independent trips should also be considered. Quality
could be based on questions related to the child’s wellbeing. 
It might relate to social well-being such as travel
with friends or to friends. It could also be based on trip
purpose or attributes of the destination. For the question
of quantity, this could relate to frequency, but it could
also examine what increases the range at which children
are allowed to explore.


Conclusion
Children’s independent travel was examined for both
weekday (or school day) and weekend trips. The results
demonstrate that there is a significant decrease in autonomy 
on the weekend compared with the weekday. Of the
explanatory variables used, distance was the strongest
factor and consistent over both sets of day. More urban
areas were also more favorable to independent travel

over the week. The only other consistent result was having 
an older sibling.
As with some previous studies on weekday travel, gender 
did not play a role, and independent trips increased
with age. Nonetheless, these correlations did not hold for
the weekend, which suggests that further study on the differences 
between these two parts of the week is needed.
For the weekend, being female played a positive role
on the independent mobility of 9 to 11 year olds, and
the younger children were found to make more independent 
trips. These individual influences changed
direction, but the structural changes such as distance
and the built environment only shifted in their strength
of influence.