School site walkability and active school transport – association,
mediation and moderation

abstract
Increasing active school transport (AST) can improve population health, but its association with the urban
form is not fully clear. This study investigated the association of an objective school walkability index
with AST and how this association is mediated by the perceived physical and social environment. 1250
Danish students aged 11–13 years completed a commuting diary and a questionnaire. The walkability
index was constituted of measures of road connectivity, traf<U+FB01>c exposure and residential density. AST’s
share in all school trips was 85.4% with little difference between genders. The school walkability index
was signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with AST (Medium vs. Low OR 2.68; High vs. Low OR 2.49). Adding the peceived 
physical and social environment variables improved the model prediction of AST, with no change
in the association with the school walkability index. Furthermore, distance to school signi<U+FB01>cantly moderated 
the association between the school walkability index and AST. This research con<U+FB01>rms the association 
between the urban form surrounding schools and AST. Medium and highly walkable school sites in
combination with a distance to school below 2 km, no speeding traf<U+FB01>c and many paths in the neighborhood 
was associated with the highest odds ratio for AST.

1. Introduction                                                                              
											
Active school transport (AST) has the potential to contribute                           
substantially to physical activity (PA) and health (Andersen et al.,                         
2011; Faulkner et al., 2009; Shephard, 2008), but globally AST is                            
declining (Faulkner et al., 2009; Fyhri et al., 2011; Hallal et al.,                         
2012). The prevalence of AST varies between countries, with Danish 
studies reporting some of the highest prevalences globally,                              
especially for cycling to school: approximately 50–70% for cycling                           
and 10–20% for walking (Cooper et al., 2006; Jensen, 2008). Nevertheless, 
even in Denmark national reports show a negative trend in                           
AST and large variations between schools (Fyhri et al., 2011; Jensen, 
2008; Stock et al., 2012). Determining if the urban form contributes 
to variations between schools, and how and for whom it                              
is in<U+FB02>uential could assist in curbing further declines in AST.                               
Walking or cycling to school has been shown to be associated                            
with a number of variables at the individual, cultural, social, physical 
and political level (Chillon et al., 2011; Davison et al., 2008;                        
Panter et al., 2008; Sirard and Slater, 2008; van Loon and Frank,                            
												
2011). This suggests that to understand this behavior a socio-ecological 
model that considers multiple levels of in<U+FB02>uences is useful
as a theoretical framework (Giles-Corti et al., 2005; Sallis et al.,
2006). Several examples of such frameworks incorporating possible 
determinants of active transport for children and adolescents
at different levels have been published (McMillan, 2005; Panter
et al., 2008; Sirard and Slater, 2008). Panter et al. (2008) present
a detailed conceptual framework for AST, where physical environment 
factors are divided into neighborhood, route and destination
attributes. Furthermore, it distinguishes between the urban form
and other physical environment factors such as facilities to assist
walking and cycling (Panter et al., 2008). The distinction between
physical structure (urban form) and street design features has been
put forward in prior research (Cervero and Kockelman, 1997), and
it has been proposed that both long-term improvements to the
physical structure and simple street design interventions for walking 
and cycling would have potential to increase active transport
(Lee and Moudon, 2008). Characteristics of the urban form and
street design do often covary, which can cause spatial multicollinearity 
and make the use of conventional statistical analyses inappropriate 
(Saelens et al., 2003; Sallis et al., 2012). Moreover, with
the spatial covariation the possibility for both opposing and synergetic 
effects on active transport follows, as for example many supporting 
facilities for active transport are present in areas where
											
traf<U+FB01>c volume is high (Johansson, 2006; Mitra and Buliung, 2012).
Therefore, it has been proposed to incorporate these interactions of
the physical environment in active transport research, and be more
aware of the urban form context (Moudon and Lee, 2003).
The socio-ecological frameworks suggests more than just associations 
on different levels, it also proposes that there may be both
moderation and mediation between and within the levels (Kremers
et al., 2006; McMillan, 2005). Yet very few studies have examined
the relationship between the urban form surrounding schools with
AST, and even fewer the roles of the perceived physical environment 
and social environment in this relationship (Giles-Corti
et al., 2009; Pont et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2011). Distance as a barrier 
to AST is indisputable (Wong et al., 2011), but acceptable distances 
differs across countries due to both cultural and physical
environment factors (D’Haese et al., 2011). Distance could also
in<U+FB02>uence the association between AST and the physical environment, 
as very short distances minimize the time the students are
present in the environment, and too long distances exceeds the
physical capabilities or reasonable use of time (Panter et al., 2008).
Age and gender are other very frequent proposed moderators,
as the perception of the environment and the perceptions of risk
differ between boys and girls and between the young and the mature 
student. Parent support or decisions regarding AST are likely
to be in<U+FB02>uenced by the physical environment, but can also be a potential 
moderator of the association between urban form and AST.
The decision making process of active or passive transport happens
in a dialogue between the parent and the child, and is in<U+FB02>uenced
by multiple factors from both the physical environment and physical 
abilities of the child (Kullman, 2010; Panter et al., 2008). As the
child matures the role of parents will shift from sole gatekeeper as
proposed by McMillan (2005), through a process of practical skill
acquisition with the environment and social interactions with
friends, to more in<U+FB02>uence from the child itself on their own independent 
mobility (Kullman, 2010).
This paper seeks to extend existing research on AST by examining
the association between AST and the urban form measured by a school
walkability index and how the perceived physical environment and
social environment affect this relationship. We hypothesized that
the urban form is associated with AST, and that this association would
be mediated and moderated by the perceived environment and social
environment factors. Furthermore, we investigated whether the associations 
were modi<U+FB01>ed by gender and distance to school.

2. Methods

2.1. Study population

The study included 1250 students attending grade 5 or 6 (aged
11–13 years) in 14 schools in the Region of Southern Denmark. The
present study draws data from the baseline measurements of the
SPACE – for physical activity study which were conducted in spring
2010 (Toftager et al., 2011). AST was one of the intervention targets
of the study, and schools with more than 50% of all students living
further than 2 km away were considered ineligible for inclusion.
We used a passive informed consent procedure, where students
were included unless the parents withdrew consent. This procedure 
has been found to be ethically appropriate in low-risk research 
in adolescents (Santelli et al., 2003). The Danish National
Committee on Health Research Ethics reviewed the study protocol
and it is registered and listed in the Danish Data Protection Agency
(reference number: 2009-41-3628).

2.2. Urban form

Relevant urban form measures for AST include attributes of the
living neighborhood of the students, the school as the destination
of Transport Geography 34 (2014) 7–15
and the route between home and school. Few studies have examined 
the urban form of the school site in relation to AST (Panter
et al., 2008; Sirard and Slater, 2008). In order to make comparisons
possible between physical environments in different settings, we
computed a cumulative urban form index that is an extension of
the index developed by the TREK study (Giles-Corti et al., 2011;
Trapp et al., 2011, 2012). The index in the TREK study is called a
school walkability index, and is associated with both walking and cycling 
to and from school (boys only), and consists of two components: 
road connectivity and vehicular traf<U+FB01>c exposure. We added
a third component, residential density, which was designed to
strengthen the index and suggested by the TREK study (Giles-Corti
et al., 2011). Similar to the TREK study, the ratio between the 2 km
pedestrian-enhanced network service area and the area of the 2 km
Euclidian buffer was used to assess the road connectivity of the
school site. Vehicular traf<U+FB01>c exposure, VTE, was calculated using
the Danish road classi<U+FB01>cations which divides roads into 4 categories: 
Roads more than 6 m wide; roads between 3 and 6 m wide;
other roads; and paths. The ratio of the length of the roads more
than 6 m wide to all other roads and paths in the walkable service
area constituted the VTE. In addition, residential density was added
as a third component, using the number of addresses divided by the
area of the 2 km pedestrian-enhanced network (Fig. 1). The three
components of the index were standardized to z-scores
(z = (x  l)/r). Then the z-score for VTE was reverse coded and
the walkability was calculated by the sum of the three z-scores.
The 14 schools were split into three groups based on the walkability
index: 4 schools with a low index (<0.60), 4 schools with a medium 
(0.6 to 0.0) and 6 schools with a high index (>0.0) (Table 1).
As evident from Fig. 2 the categorization of the composite index resulted 
in two groups with relative similar characteristics within the
groups (low and high index), while there were less homogeneity
between the four schools categorized as medium walkability.

2.3. Other independent variables

For statistical modeling purposes the other independent variables 
were categorized into three types: individual/demographic,
perceived environment, and social environment variables. The
individual/demographic variables included age, gender, household
income, parent nativity, and distance to school. Age and gender
were obtained directly from school records, and parental household 
income and nativity were obtained using the Danish Civil Registration 
System (Pedersen, 2011). Parent household income was
recoded into tertiles (low, medium and high) and nativity was
dichotomized (both parents born in Denmark or not). The shortest
distance to school was measured with the network analyst extension 
to ESRI ArcGIS 10.0 using a pedestrian-enhanced network
(paths and tracks included).
The perceived environment en route to school and in the neighborhood 
was assessed using a web-based questionnaire completed
by the students at the school with teacher supervision. The questionnaire 
addressed overall safety en route to school and questions
on cycle paths, road crossings, car traf<U+FB01>c density and speed in the
neighborhood of residence (see Table 3 for exact wording). The response 
options were on 5-point Likert scale from ‘‘strongly disagree’’ 
to ‘‘strongly agree’’, except from cycle route safety, for
which the extreme options were ‘‘very safe’’ and ‘‘very unsafe‘‘.
The questions were developed speci<U+FB01>cally for this study and were
especially targeting conditions related to cycling. The question
about route safety was also speci<U+FB01>c to cycling, so respondents
who never cycled (10.6%) did not answer the question. The new
items were pilot tested prior to the main data collection including
cognitive interview validation (Collins, 2003; Toftager et al., 2011).
The social environment variables were also obtained from the
web-based questionnaire, and included perceived parental

encouragement of cycling to school (social support) and the perceived 
prevalence of friends’ and parents’ cycling (social norm).                               
outcome variable, i.e. a respondent could have x number of active

2.4. Dependent variable  
				                                                                       											
Mode of transportation to and from school was assessed using a
5-day active commuting diary. The respondents marked their                                      
transportation mode(s) choosing between: by bicycle; by foot; by
car; by bus or train; by roller-skates, skateboard or the like; or wasn’t                           
in school. For the analysis every trip was dichotomized to active                               
transport all way (by bicycle, by foot or by roller-skates, skateboard                          

or the like) or passive transport (by car or by bus or train). Together
with the total number of reported trips it constituted the binomial
trips out of n reported trips. There was no lower limit for the total
number of reported trips to be included in the analyses.

2.5. Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were carried out using STATA (v. 12), and
the association between AST and the independent variables was
evaluated using multilevel statistical models. To account for the

clustering of behavior in the 14 schools, a two-level structure of
students (Level 1) nested in schools (Level 2) was applied. Bivariate
logistic regression analyses were used to compare the proportion
of active trips across each independent variable. Afterwards, a series 
of multivariable logistic regressions were applied to: (1) evaluate 
the association between AST and the school walkability index;
(2) observe whether adding perceived environment and social
environment variables changed the association (possible mediation); 
and (3) investigate whether the association was different

between certain groups (moderation). All analyses were adjusted
for the individual and demographic variables (age, gender, parent
nativity, household income and distance to school). Model
improvement tests were performed using the likelihood ratio test
to determine if the inclusion of the additional effects (main effects
and interactions) signi<U+FB01>cantly improved the prediction of the likelihood 
of AST (Cervero, 2002; McMillan, 2007). Goodness-of-<U+FB01>t for
all models was assessed using the likelihood ratio index by McFadden 
(Windmeijer, 1995). To interpret the variation between the 14
schools an intraclass correlation coef<U+FB01>cient (ICC) was calculated as
r2
ICC ¼ r2 þ2r2 where r22 is the variance between schools (second-level
1    2
variance) and r21 is the variance between individuals approximated
2
as r21 ¼ p3 (Goldstein et al., 2002). A large ICC would indicate that
differences at the school level account for much of the variation

in AST, and if ICC decreases in the multivariable models, it implies
that the included variables account for that part of the school level
variation.

3. Results

From the eligible population sample of 1348 students, 1250 reported 
at least one trip to or from school and <U+FB01>lled in the questionnaire, 
which gives a response rate of 92.7%. In total 91.1% of the
included students reported eight or more trips and the average
number of reported trips was 9.3. A total of 61.0% of the students
reported the same travel mode on all trips, while 24.9% used two
different travel modes and 14.1% used three or more different
modes. Information about household income and parents’ nativity
were obtainable for all but <U+FB01>ve respondents, which were given the
mean sample household income and coded as native Danes.

3.1. Sample characteristics

Of all reported trips, the share of walking (including roller-skating 
and skateboarding) and cycling to or from school was 15.9%
and 69.5% respectively. A total of 87.1% of the students used the
bicycle at least once, and 29.6% walked at least once. Six percent
of the students used merely passive transport. There was considerable 
variation between the 14 schools. The share of walking trips
ranged from 5.8% to 31.0% and for cycling the range was 41.8% to
85.4%. The overall share of active trips ranged from 71.6% to 94.7%.
Table 2 shows the descriptive characteristics of the included
respondents and the unadjusted association with AST. One half of
the respondents were 12 years (mean age: 12.5 years), 51.7% were
boys and 9.1% had a least one non-native Danish parent. Girls and
students in the medium and high household income tertile had signi<U+FB01>cant 
higher odds ratio for AST (OR 1.15 CI 95% 1.03–1.28, OR
1.44 CI 95% 1.27–1.65 and OR 1.39 CI 95% 1.21–1.59). The median
distance to school for all trips was 1.2 km (range: 0.02–42.6 km)
and, as suspected, there was a signi<U+FB01>cant difference in travel
modes. For trips below 0.5 km, 1 km and 2 km, active travel modes
accounted for 97.5%, 96.1% and 93.4% of all trips, respectively, and
the active modal share was still most prevalent up to 4 km. In total
10.4% of students lived more than 4 km from school, and this was
associated with much less AST (33.3%).

3.2. Bivariate analyses

Table 3 shows the unadjusted associations between AST and the
school walkability index, perceived environment and social environment 
variables. Attending schools with middle or high walkability 
index were associated with signi<U+FB01>cant higher odds ratios
for AST. The association is non-linear in nature, and 76.6%, 90.4%
and 87.0% of all trips were made by active transport in the schools
with the lowest, middle and highest school walkability index,
respectively (Fig. 2). In total 81.5% of students perceived their route
as safe or very safe, which was associated with 90.5% of the trips
made by active transport (OR 6.35 CI 95% 5.48–7.36). More trips
were made by active modes if there were many paths and safe
crossings (OR 3.81 CI 95% 3.35–4.33 and OR 3.02 CI 95% 2.59–
3.53), while heavily traf<U+FB01>cked neighborhoods and high-speed traf<U+FB01>c 
were associated with less trips (OR 0.61 CI 95% 0.53–0.69 and
OR 0.27 CI 95% 0.24–0.31). Almost 90% of the students reported
that their friends cycled to school every day and one half reported
parents cycling weekly or parents encouraging cycling. This was
signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with more AST (OR 1.86 CI 95% 1.29–
2.68, OR 3.00 CI 95% 2.63–3.42 and OR 1.25 CI 95% 1.10–1.43,
respectively).

3.3. Multivariable analyses

To examine problems of multi-collinearity we performed a
Spearman’s test and used r > 0.60 as an indicator of collinearity.
None of the independent variables had an r > 0.60 and therefore
all were kept in the analyses. Table 4 shows the adjusted analyses
of the association between AST and the school walkability index,
perceived environment and social environment variables. We only
present the odds ratios between ‘‘unsafe’’ vs. ‘‘safe’’ and ‘‘disagree’’
vs. ‘‘agree’’ (‘‘don’t know’’ and ‘‘neither nor’’ are not shown). The
association between the school walkability index and AST was almost 
unchanged after the adjustment for both the demographic
variables and distance to school, i.e. odds ratio for medium walkability 
changed from 2.94 to 2.76 and for high walkability from
2.12 to 2.79 (Tables 3 and 4). The inclusion of the perceived and social 
environment variables in the model resulted only in minor
attenuations in the magnitude of the parameter estimates of the
coef<U+FB01>cients. After inclusion of all independent variables in the
model (Model 3), the odds ratio of AST was higher for students
in the schools with greater walkability (Low vs. medium OR 2.68
CI 95% 1.69–3.77; Low vs. high OR 2.49 CI 95% 1.64–3.77). Furthermore, 
the odds ratio for AST was higher if the route was perceived
as safe (OR 1.86 CI 95% 1.51–2.28) and if they had many paths in
the neighborhood (OR 1.28 CI 95% 1.07–1.53). In contrast, perceiving 
high-speed traf<U+FB01>c in the neighborhood was associated with signi<U+FB01>cantly 
less AST (OR 0.50 CI 95% 0.40–0.61). Of the social
environment variables, social norm seemed more important than
parental encouragement. Students with parents cycling weekly
had higher odds ratio for AST (OR 1.92 CI 95% 1.63–2.26), and this
was also the case if their friends cycled daily (OR 1.63 CI 95% 1.06–
2.62). Safe crossings and heavily traf<U+FB01>cked streets in the neighborhood 
together with parental encouragement did not show a significant 
relationship in the adjusted model.
The model improvement tests showed that the inclusion of
school site, perceived environment and social environment variables 
signi<U+FB01>cantly improved the model (p < 0.001) and the McFadden’s 
likelihood ratio index improved from 0.381 to 0.435. The
intraclass correlation coef<U+FB01>cient (ICC) was 8.9% for the individual
and demographic adjusted model, and attenuated to 3.1% when
the school walkability index was included in the model. The inclusion 
of the perceived built and social environment variables resulted 
in minor changes in the ICCs.

3.4. Interaction analyses

Table 5 shows the results of the interactions analyses in terms
of marginal effects on active trips per week. The school walkability
index categories medium and high were collapsed due to the non-linear 
relationship and to simplify the interpretation of the interactions. 
The association between AST and the school walkability index 
was moderated by distance, inasmuch as students living
within 0.5 km network distance from school did not differ by
school site walkability. The proportion of AST declined steadily
from 0.5 km to 4 km for the low walkability schools, but for the
medium and high walkable schools the very high levels of AST remained 
up to 2 km before declining. The interaction with gender
and many paths in the neighborhood was almost signi<U+FB01>cant. Girls
in the low walkable schools used AST more often than boys, but
there was no gender difference on AST in the high or medium
walkability areas. Regarding the presence of many paths in the
neighborhood, a positive answer increased odds for AST in both
low and high walkable schools, but the odds increased more for
the high and medium walkable schools. Perception of safe crossings 
in the neighborhood and parental encouragement for AST
did not show any overall sign of having a moderating effect on
the association.

4. Discussion                                                                                    
												
In this study, the share of AST, and especially cycling to school,                          
was very high compared with other international studies. However,                                
there was still considerable variation within the schools included in                            
the study, with an ICC of AST at 9.2%. Much of this variation was explained 
by the school walkability index, with a decrease in ICC to                               
3.1% when the index was included in the model. Notably, the variation 
was low between the schools with medium and high walkability, 
which was evident with from the small difference in odds
ratios. This could imply a threshold effect of the school walkability
index, which is supported by the ‘locally weighted scatterplot
smoothing’ curve of standardized AST in Fig. 2.
We focused on the school site, perceived environment and social 
environment and adjusted the analyses for important independent 
variables, including distance to school and gender. Girls and

boys had almost the same level of AST, which is similar to other
studies with overall high levels of AST (Cooper et al., 2006; de Brijn 
et al., 2005; Johansson et al., 2011). In other studies, the lower
level of AST among girls is explained by more protective or restrictive parents 
(Davison et al., 2008; McMillan, 2005), and higher perceptions 
of fear in the neighborhood among girls than boys
(Johansson et al., 2010). The tradition and culture supporting female 
bicycling in Denmark (Carstensen and Ebert, 2012) in combination 
with a suf<U+FB01>ciently active-transport-friendly infrastructure
may explain the <U+FB01>ndings of no gender difference in our study.
We hypothesized that girls would use less AST at the lowest walkable 
school sites, but the results from the interaction analysis indicated 
the opposite, i.e. girls used AST on more trips at the low
walkable schools. One possible explanation might be found in an
earlier maturation in girls combined with lower fear of stranger
danger, which previously has been described in a Swedish study
of children’s independent mobility (Johansson, 2006).
As anticipated, distance to school was an important independent 
variable associated with AST. A distance of 3 km has been proposed 
as a reasonable maximum distance for active transport in
Belgium (11–12 years), but in this study 60.7% of all trips of 3–
4 km were still made by bicycle (D’Haese et al., 2011). This supports 
the hypothesis that the acceptable distance for students to
use AST varies by country and could potentially be expanded by
improving the infrastructure and creating a safer active transport
environment. In addition to being an important independent variable, 
distance has also been proposed as an important moderator of
the relationship between AST and the environment (Panter and
Jones, 2010; Panter et al., 2008). We hypothesized a non-linear
moderating relationship with distance, where the walkability index 
had the lowest association when the distance was either very
short or very long. In fact, we found that within 0.5 km there was
no difference between the low and the medium/high walkable
school sites. The high level of AST remained up to a distance of
2 km at the medium/high walkable school sites, but dropped as
distance increased above 0.5 km at the low walkable school sites.
The difference did not attenuate as hypothesized for the longest
distances, implying that the school site environment also has an
association for students living further away.
The high levels of AST in Denmark has previously been explained 
by the persistent effort by the Danish government and
municipalities to run campaigns and safe route to school programs
(Jensen, 2008). By far most students in our sample perceived their
cycle route as safe or very safe, and this was associated with higher
levels of AST. Differences in the perceived neighborhood environment 
showed signi<U+FB01>cant associations with AST and may account
for variations in students AST. The three elements, paths, traf<U+FB01>c,
and crossings, which previously have been reported and theorized
to have an effect on AST (McMillan, 2005; Panter et al., 2008; van
Loon and Frank, 2011), also showed associations in our study. In
the multivariable model ‘‘many paths’’ was positively associated
with AST (p < 0.01), and ‘‘speeding traf<U+FB01>c’’ was negatively associated
with AST (p < 0.001). Additionally, having many paths in the neighborhood 
was associated with larger increase in marginal effects in
the high and medium walkable schools (p = 0.10), indicating an extra 
effect where both conditions were in favor of AST. This <U+FB01>nding
supports the hypothesis of synergetic effects (Sallis et al., 2012),
and should be investigate further. Heavily traf<U+FB01>cked streets in
the neighborhood were associated with less AST in the unadjusted
analyses, but this association was attenuated in the adjusted analysis, 
which suggests that the speed of the cars may be perceived as
a more serious barrier to AST than the presence of many cars. A
similar attenuation occurred with safe crossings, which in addition
did not moderate the urban form association with AST.
Adding the social environment variables signi<U+FB01>cantly improved
the prediction of the likelihood of AST, but did not affect the AST

and school site association. In general, there was a strong social
norm of cycling and one half of the students perceived parental
support for cycling as well. In the adjusted analysis the social norm
was signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with AST, but parental support was
not. Furthermore, the interaction analysis with parental support
showed no moderating effect with the AST and school site association, 
implying that the school site environments are associated
with AST independent of parent support.
The school walkability index presented here is a further development 
of the school walkability index used in the TREK study in
Perth, Australia (Giles-Corti et al., 2011; Trapp et al., 2011). Due
to a different study design and availability of other types of geographical 
data it was not possible to replicate the Australian TREK
study exactly. We added a residential density variable to strengthen 
the index as proposed by the TREK study authors, as denser
neighborhoods <U+FB01>rst of all imply shorter distances to school for
more students. We provide further evidence con<U+FB01>rming that the
urban form around schools has an important impact on AST in a
setting where cycling to school is very prevalent, and recommend
future research to further elaborate on this relationship.
We also investigated how the perceived built and social environment 
affected the AST and school site association, but found
that the association was very stable i.e. independent of the perceived 
built and social environment urban form is associated with
AST. The puzzling question remains: why did the inclusion of perceived 
environment variables not attenuate the association as proposed 
in frameworks of AST (McMillan, 2005; Panter et al., 2008).
One explanation could be that the perceived physical environment
characteristics were answered from a subjective point of view,
with limited amount of knowledge about other type of environments. 
The student would compare his/her neighborhood and
route to school – the action space – with neighborhoods and routes
which he/she possesses knowledge about – the activity space (Horton 
and Reynolds, 1971).This would imply that the student compares 
their route or neighborhood with other students in the
same environment, and not against a common reference. Another
explanation could be that the school walkability index is capturing
the environment within a 2 km walkable service area of the school.
Even though most students lived within 2 km from school, there
would be individual differences within the school perimeter, and
for the students living outside the perimeter. These general good
or poor conditions for the majority could affect the overall levels
of AST, but also explain the individual variations.
The only signi<U+FB01>cant moderator was distance to school, which
attenuated the association below 0.5 km. At the same time, this
interaction analysis supported the hypothesis that the acceptable
distance for young people to use AST is associated with urban form
characteristics: Students in this study attending medium/high
walkable schools had the highest level of AST up to 2 km from
school, while AST steadily diminished at the low walkable schools
beyond 0.5 km.

4.1. Strengths and limitations

The cross-sectional design and the enlisting of interested
schools for the intervention study make it impossible to draw conclusions 
about causal relationships and generalize the results directly 
to other Danish schools. The urban form surroundings the
schools were measured with a composite measure of attributes
within 2 km network distance. The composite measure cannot directly 
be translated to practice or general recommendations, but
was intended to increase the understanding of the interactions between 
urban form characteristic and other important potential
determinants of AST. The low number of participating school made
it impossible to investigate the importance of the three
components separately, or to apply interaction analyses of their

interrelationships. It is possible that a different scale than the 2 km
would have altered the relationships presented here (Mitra and
Buliung, 2012), but as 77.2% of the sample lived within that distance, 
and therefore within a 10 min cycle trip from home, we
found it reasonable to keep the distance from the original TREK
study (Giles-Corti et al., 2011; Moudon and Lee, 2003).
AST was very prevalent in this study, but like other Danish surveys, 
we found variation between schools. The high prevalence is
considered a strength of the study, as non-AST is more likely to
be caused by an intentional choice rooted in ‘‘real’’ barriers. The response 
rate on 92.7% for the questionnaire and the active commuting 
diary, in addition to the high speci<U+FB01>city of both dependent and
independent variables, are further strengths of the study. By using
trips as the binomial outcome instead of ‘‘usual travel mode’’, we
included the important information that one-third of the students
used more than one mode of transportation during a week. We
made a binary distinction between active versus passive travel,
but future research should identify determinants of different active
travel modes e.g. walking compared to bicycling. We used a pedestrian-enhanced 
network that included cycle paths and smaller
tracks to calculate the shortest distance between school and home.
However, there can still be reasons for students to take alternative
routes than the shortest routes calculated. Finally, we investigated
a speci<U+FB01>c age group, which increased the precision of the estimates, 
but also decreased the variability and generalizability to
other age groups.

5. Conclusion

Distance to school is a very important aspect of AST, but this
study found that for distances up to 4 km cycling remained the
preferred transportation mode. The school walkability index was
associated with AST and the variation between schools was largely
explained by it. This association was barely affected by the perceived 
and social environment, suggesting a direct relationship between 
AST and school walkability. We recommend that future
studies incorporate the active commuting diary to ensure high sensitivity 
of the outcome variable and further develop the school site
walkability index approach to guide future interventions. At
schools with high walkability, promotion and education strategies
would probably be an effective strategy, while other environmental 
interventions are needed in low walkable school sites. Here,
interventions that would create more supportive environments,
such as speed limits, cycle paths and safe crossings, should be
investigated further.