Children aged 9–14 living in disadvantaged areas in England: Opportunities
and barriers for cycling

abstract
The aim of this paper is to take a holistic perspective to explore levels of cycling and opportunities and
barriers to increase children’s safer cycling in disadvantaged areas in England. The study was one part of a
larger study which explored the factors underlying the high level of road traf<U+FB01>c casualties especially
among children in the most disadvantaged areas of England and to explore how this impacts on mobility
and quality of life. The methods involved a cross sectional survey comprising school based questionnaire
surveys with children aged 9–14 and focus groups with parents who had children within this age range.
The surveys were conducted in 2007 and the focus groups during 2008. 4286 children completed the survey 
and eight focus groups were held. Bike ownership (77%) was high, use in previous week moderate
(39%) but only 2% cycled to school. Ownership was signi<U+FB01>cantly lower in minority ethnic groups. Despite
young children’s strong preference to travel by cycle (30%) than walk or go by car, most parents felt it was
too hazardous. It is unlikely that these <U+FB01>ndings would be any different from the rest of England, however
the combination of environmental and social factors may elevate the risks for young cyclists in these
areas. This paper concludes that a number of barriers exist to increasing levels of cycling among children
living in disadvantaged areas particularly amongst ethnic groups. These barriers could be addressed by
environmental modi<U+FB01>cations to reduce speeds and by reducing the levels of antisocial driving and riding
in residential areas and around destinations where children travel, by providing cycle training to improve
children’s skills and parent’s con<U+FB01>dence, and by providing secure storage facilities for bikes. Until these
barriers are addressed it is unlikely that cycling will increase despite the strong preferences children have
to travel by bike. Such preferences to cycle provide an opportunity for local authorities to act on.

1. Introduction                                                                              
											
Both within England and many other high income countries, governments 
have responded to growing concerns about obesity in the                             
population with initiatives to increase physical activity as part of     

everyday activity, especially by encouraging more walking and cycling. 
If these modal shifts do occur, there will be an even greater reason 
for concentrating on the safety of these vulnerable road users.
Increasing cycling levels would impact on a number of government
agendas by helping to improve health and reducing obesity,
providing sustainable transport and reducing carbon emissions
(Sustainable Development Commission, 2007). Cycling is promoted
by the government in an attempt to transform the way we travel to
create a greener, healthier nation (Cycling England, 2009).
Arguably, trying to increase the levels of cycling in disadvantaged 
areas is more important than in more af<U+FB02>uent areas because
obesity levels tend to be highest in the lower socioeconomic
groups (Law et al., 2007). However, there is clearly a balance to
be struck between the bene<U+FB01>ts of increased physical activity and
the risks of injury because whilst all people are exposed to the risk
of injury on the road as part of their everyday life, the burden of
these injuries is not evenly spread across our society (Hayes                    

et al., 2008). Road traf<U+FB01>c casualties disproportionately affect some
groups. Disadvantaged people and those living in disadvantaged
neighbourhoods are much more affected than those living in more
af<U+FB02>uent areas; some age groups of vulnerable road users, such as
children, young adults and older people, bear a greater burden
(Graham et al., 2005; Lyons et al., 2003). For children the risks of
injury as a cyclist are not equal across society: children from the
lowest social class are 26 times more likely to be killed compared
to their more af<U+FB02>uent peers in the highest social class (Edwards
et al., 2006). This is not surprising given that the traf<U+FB01>c environments 
in which people in disadvantaged areas live are some of
the most hazardous (Christie et al., 2007a) and this combined with
the poor quality of the built environment contributes to obesity by
deterring people from active travel in England (Law et al., 2007).
The risk of injury as a road user also appears to be higher for
people from the disadvantaged Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic
(BAME) population. There is a small but growing body of evidence
on the link between socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and road traf<U+FB01>c 
injury. Ethnic minority children are at increased risk of road
traf<U+FB01>c injury as pedestrians (Christie, 1995a; Thomson et al.,
2001) though little is known about their risk as cyclists. There is
also some evidence to suggest that BAME groups are less likely
to adopt safety behaviours such as wearing a seat belt (Christie
et al., 2008). However, one of the most dif<U+FB01>cult problems in understanding 
the injury risk of children is to differentiate the effects of
socioeconomic status and ethnicity because many minority ethnic
residents tend to be the most disadvantaged in society (Thomson
et al., 2001). To add to the complexity, people from minority ethnic
groups tend to cluster in speci<U+FB01>c areas, which are often areas of
multiple disadvantage, that is areas that are characterised by having 
higher a than average proportion of people unemployed or on
low incomes; lone parent families; with lower educational
achievement, poorer health outcomes and lower life expectancy
(Owen, 1992, 1994). It is the environment that in<U+FB02>uences behaviour 
and risks that lead to poor health outcomes in disadvantaged
areas (Macintyre et al., 1993; Sloggett and Joshi, 1994).
It has been argued that a holistic approach is particularly useful
in trying to explain the complex factors that underlie road user
behaviour (Crawford, 2008). In understanding health inequalities
a holistic approach is represented by the model proposed by Dahlgren 
and Whitehead (1991) whereby an individuals health is
determined not only by their individual characteristics but the
wider social, economic and environmental factors.
The evidence (Brussoni et al., unpublished data) suggests that
a range of multifaceted and interrelated factors are associated
with children’s risk as vulnerable road users in disadvantaged
areas. Children living in overcrowded accommodation where
there is limited play space may mean that children play out in
the street. The streets are often the most convenient and cheapest 
place for children to play as often parents may not be able to
pay for or transport their children to supervised activities after
school. Economic factors limit parent’s ability to purchase safety
equipment such as cycle helmets. Factors related to low parental
age and low education may in<U+FB02>uence parents understanding of
the risks that their children face and how to give their children
information to avoid risk. In addition, the ability of parents/
carers to supervise children may be in<U+FB02>uenced by being a single
parent in families where often there are several children and
where depression and family illness can also in<U+FB02>uence a parent’s
ability to safeguard their children.
Environmental risks include speed of traf<U+FB01>c, housing type and
density, kerb parking and road density, traf<U+FB01>c volume, and lack
of safe crossing sites and play areas. Different housing types
are also associated with different child casualty rates. Many of
these factors are highly correlated with low socioeconomic status. 
These road environments are associated with older residential 
areas developed between the early 1900s to late 1950s
before mass car ownership and are characterised by long straight
roads which give rise to high vehicle speeds and tend to have
considerable on street parking because there are few facilities
for off road parking. These residential areas were built before
1960 after which road safety became an integral part of the
housing development guidance (Christie, 1995a; Sharples et al.,
1990; Ward et al., 1994). Disadvantaged children are also more
likely to spend time in these hazardous road environments playing 
unsupervised or spending time in the street and are much
less likely to go to clubs after school compared to their more
advantaged counterparts (Christie, 1995b).
England could become safer for cyclists because other countries
have achieved this. For example, taking exposure into account,
child cyclists in the UK are much more likely to be killed than their
counterparts in other European countries such as: The Netherlands, 
Germany and Sweden (Christie et al., 2007b). Particularly
for young children, parents are the gatekeepers of their child’s
independence but have to make a judgement about the ‘trade off’
between independence and safety. Parents have a key responsibility 
for keeping children safe but also wish to allow children some
independent mobility in order to develop social networks and to
learn about the external environment through interacting with it
(Bjorklid, 1992; The Children’s Society, 2007). All too often parent’s
safety fears means that children are not permitted to cycle on the
road (Lorenc et al., 2008; Christie et al., 2007b). These fears are not
without foundation. Analysis of UK national fatality data shows
that drivers from more disadvantaged areas are over represented
in crashes involving reckless driving (driving at speed) and alcohol
(Clarke et al., 2008) and are much more likely to drive unlicensed,
untaxed and uninsured which are also predictors of collision
involvement (Knox et al., 2003). In this situation it is hard to imagine 
that ‘safety in numbers’ will be achieved, the phenomenon
whereby increasing prevalence is associated with proportionally
greater safety (Jacobsen, 2003).
In 2004, the <U+FB02>agship Neighbourhood Road Safety Initiative
(NRSI) was set up by the UK Department for Transport (DfT),
in response to the Government’s commitment to take into account 
the signi<U+FB01>cantly higher incidence of casualties in disadvantaged 
communities whilst improving people’s mobility and
accessibility to local services. The NRSI focused on <U+FB01>fteen of
the 15% most disadvantaged local authorities in England (based
on the Indices of Multiple Deprivation) and which also had the
highest child casualty rates. This study on cycling was part of
a larger study funded by the DfT to increase understanding of
the links between mobility, safety and quality of life in disadvantaged 
communities.
The aim of this study was to inform our understanding of the opportunities 
and barriers for cycling in disadvantaged areas from a holistic
perspective exploring the role of individual, social and environmental
factors. The speci<U+FB01>c research objectives of this study were:

 To explore children’s travel in disadvantaged areas to help
understand whether their exposure is different from national
patterns particularly in relation to cycling.
 To explore how children vary in their self reported cycling
behaviour in relation to age, gender and ethnicity.
 To explore opportunities and barriers for children’s cycling
including their desire to cycle and their parents views about this.

2. Method

2.1. Quantitative methods

Questionnaire surveys were arranged in primary and secondary 
schools in all the 15 NRSI areas. The NRSI areas were

N. Christie et al. / Journal
relatively small and schools were selected within these areas.
Table 1 shows the town and region of England where the NRSI
areas are located.
Quantitative surveys were conducted among school children
(aged 9–14). This age range was chosen because it represents the
ages where children become independent travellers marking the
transition between primary and secondary school. Class teachers
administered the self-completion questionnaire to pupils in their
schools. In multi-lingual schools translators were used to assist
with questionnaire administration.
The questionnaire sought information on the places children
had travelled to in the last week, what transport they had
used and sociodemographic information on age, gender and
ethnicity.


2.2. Qualitative methods

Eight focus groups were conducted during 2008 with parents of
school children aged 9–14 and who lived in NRSI areas. These were
conducted in selected areas which had high levels of disadvantage
and child road casualty levels. These areas were largely in the
northern areas of England:

  Bolton.
  Bradford.
  Blackburn with Darwen.
  Blackpool.
  Oldham.
  Salford.

  Stoke on Trent.
  Wigan.

One focus group was conducted exclusively among Sikh and
Muslim women. The participants represented their local population 
and requested that the group only involved members of their
own community as a condition of their participation. Another was
conducted among parents where at least one child had special
needs such as autism, Down’s syndrome or deafness.

Participants were provided with information sheets and consent 
forms. The consent form also sought agreement for the proceedings 
to be taped. Parents were recruited through a variety of
means; through residents associations, via liaison with schools
and through other community based initiatives such as regeneration 
projects. Participants were paid a cash incentive to attend
the focus groups.
All focus groups were taped and transcribed and emergent
themes were identi<U+FB01>ed using thematic content analysis (Gibbs,
1997). Data were also examined by a second coder to ensure
consistency in approach. Quotes presented in this paper are used
to exemplify themes that arose. Ethical approval for the study

was granted by University of the West of England Ethics
Committee.

3. Results

3.1. Quantitative data

3.1.1. Where children go and how they travel
The self-completion questionnaire was completed by 4286 children 
aged 9–14 from 37 schools; 51% were boys; 38.8% were aged
9–10, 48.5% aged 11–12 and 12.7% aged 13–14. Based on School
Census (2007) <U+FB01>gures for average class sizes in Key Stage 2 (primary 
school for children aged 5–11) (27.2:1) and Key Stage 3 (secondary 
school for children aged 11–16 years old) (21.3:1) this
targeted, purposive, sampling approach yielded a response rate of
98%.
Children were asked to indicate on the questionnaire, from a
speci<U+FB01>ed list, which places they had been to in the last week and
how they had travelled from a speci<U+FB01>ed list of destinations. This
data showed that cycling is the least used mode. When children
do cycle they are more likely to do so when travelling to parks
and play areas (Table 2).
A comparison of responses of survey participants aged 11–14
with those in the National Travel Survey (conducted in England
in 2007) aged 11–16 (the nearest comparable age range) showed
that children in disadvantaged areas were signi<U+FB01>cantly more likely
to walk to school (Chi squared = 19.2, P < 0.0001), signi<U+FB01>cantly less
likely to cycle (Chi squared = 7.35, P = 0.007) or travel by bus (Chi
squared = 18.17, P < 0.0001) compared to children in the national
sample (Table 3).

3.1.2. Prevalence of cycle use, safety behaviour and travel preferences
Table 4 shows prevalence of cycling, safety behaviours and travel 
preferences by age group.
The majority of children owned a bike, and over half of these
said they had cycled in the last week; but only 2% cycled to school.
Only 40% of all students sampled had received cycle pro<U+FB01>ciency
training. Around half of those who owned a cycle helmet said they
had worn their helmet last time they cycled. As children get older
they are less likely to report owning or wearing a helmet a pattern
that is shown nationally (Sharratt et al., 2009). The number who
own or have access to a bike is very similar to the national average,
for children aged 11–16 years which is 76% (http://www.dft.go-
v.uk/pgr/statistics/datatablespublications/nts/).
Children were asked on the questionnaire ‘‘If you could change
the way you travelled to school, would you prefer to travel by:
‘‘Car’’, ’’Walk’’, ‘‘Bike’’, ‘‘School Bus’’, ‘‘Public bus’’, ‘‘Taxi’’, ‘‘Motor-bike’’
, ‘‘Train/Metro’’ ‘‘Skateboard/skates’’? Children were asked
to tick one box only. Around a third of children aged 9–10 years
at the primary stage of education would prefer to change to cycling, 
a larger percentage than for any other mode. There is a clear
tail off in preferences to cycle as children get older marking the
transition from primary to secondary school.

3.1.3. Ethnicity
The population was ethnically diverse, with 72% reporting that
they were white, 11% Pakistani, 4% black, 3% Indian, 3% Bangladeshi 
and 4% of mixed ethnicity. This distribution is not typical of the
UK as a whole but is a typical pattern in disadvantaged wards (Dorsett, 1998). 
Table 5 shows that young people who de<U+FB01>ne themselves 
as black African, Indian Pakistani and Bangladeshi are less
likely to own a bicycle than those who are white or black Caribbean. 
Similar trends appear in terms of those young people reporting 
that they have never ridden a bicycle. Only 1 in 10 young white
and black Caribbean reported having never ridden a bike compared
to over 1 in 4 Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi young people.

3.2. Qualitative themes

The eight focus groups engaged a total of 67 participants. On
average, there were eight participants per group with 90% being
mothers. The qualitative research was used to explore parent’s
views of children’s travel and safety to help identify opportunities
and barriers for children’s active travel. A number of key themes
emerged.

3.2.1. The safety of the road traf<U+FB01>c environment
Clear barriers to children’s cycling are parent’s fears about the
danger posed by their local traf<U+FB01>c environment. The narratives of
parents revealed that they had considerable concerns about safety
in their neighbourhoods. It is concerns like these that have led Play
England (2010) to launch a manifesto for play to address the serious 
consequences that parental anxieties have for the health and
happiness of children. Several of our participants had known about
collisions in their neighbourhood thus increasing their anxieties
about the safety of the roads. There were feelings that many drivers
drove too fast in their neighbourhoods and many young people,
as drivers and motorbike riders, were antisocial in their use of the
roads:
‘‘The thing about that estate there is a lot of the people who is
speeding round on mopeds and things at the minute. They are people 
who live there who they know there are kids there, they know
the kids. Mine are not allowed to play on the street even the 9 year
old is just not allowed.’’ (Focus group with parents, Town of
Wigan, 2008)

Parents made judgements about allowing their children to cycle
on the roads based on how safe they felt the traf<U+FB01>c was. Many parents 
mentioned that both they and their children wanted to cycle
but that they prevented them doing so because they felt to was too
dangerous:
Interpreter ‘‘No they wouldn’t want to ride a bicycle and they feel
that the road is too busy and they would not like to see their children 
on the bicycles because of this. That is why.’’ (Focus group
with Sikh and Muslim parents, Town of Bradford, 2008)


3.2.2. Children’s skills as cyclists
Many parents felt that their children did not have suf<U+FB01>cient
skills as cyclists to deal with the road traf<U+FB01>c environment and this
meant they were not con<U+FB01>dent that their children could cope on
the roads:

‘‘My little boy one day came in and he said to me ‘‘Mum can I ride
the bike to school’’, I said ‘‘No chance’’ he said ‘‘Why I have got
lights I will be all right’’ then he said ‘‘When am I supposed to stop
on the road.’’ . . .Do you really think I am going to let my son on a
road with a bike, no chance whether he is walking it, biking it, it is
dangerous, end of.’’ (Focus group with parents, Town of Oldham,
2008)

Given the documented and perceived poorer safety records in
these areas, these parental anxieties are undermining hitherto normal 
childhood experiences. Growth of risk aversion and its intrusion 
into every aspect of children’s lives restricts children’s play,
limits their freedom of movement, corrodes their relationships
with adults and constrains their exploration of physical, social
and virtual worlds (Gill, 2007).

3.2.3. Concerns about cycle theft
Another barrier for children cycling to school was parent’s perception 
that if children took their bikes to school they were likely
to be stolen:

‘‘ It is no good with bicycles because they get nicked when they go
to school on them, do you know what I mean, be lucky if you have
got a wheel there’’ (Focus group with parents, Town of Stoke,
2008)


3.2.4. Children would like to cycle more

Moreover some parents felt that there was a great unmet need
among children to be able to ride their bikes and use them as part
of their leisure activities:
‘‘A lot of the kids do always ask about somewhere safe to ride their
bikes because I don’t think it is particularly safe to ride bikes round
here. . . .like waste ground opposite our building which is where
they have been doing an awful lot of bike riding making jumps
and making ramps because there isn’t anywhere that provide that
for them.’’ (Focus with parents, Town of Stoke, 2008)


4. Discussion

Our study suffers from the usual limitations of employing a self
completion survey method with children from disadvantaged multi-ethnic 
backgrounds where literacy levels may be low. Despite
piloting the questionnaire, it is quite clear that some children
struggled with completing it and for some questions there were
missing values where the questionnaire had been partially or
incorrectly completed. This was a particular problem in the schools
where multiple primary languages were spoken amongst the
children.
A major strength of this study is that it engaged a large number
of participants, recruiting hard to reach groups such as those from
ethnic minority groups and parents of children with special needs.
Although the voluntary and self selecting sampling technique may
mean we were more likely to engage with families that are less excluded 
than others our experience of recruiting through people
who work with the community suggests that we have been able
to include a broad range of families from varying social and cultural 
backgrounds from different districts. Given the diversity
among the focus groups, the recurrent themes across different
groups and districts suggests that the issues raised in this research
are common problems and are relevant to disadvantaged communities 
across England and more widely. A further strength of this
study is that it integrates data from quantitative and qualitative
methodologies providing evidence about the opportunities and
barriers to facilitate cycling in disadvantaged areas which engaged
with both children and their parent’s perspectives.
This research adopted a holistic approach to explore the role of
social, economic and environmental factors in children’s cycling
behaviour in disadvantaged areas in England. This study has shown
that whilst bike ownership is relatively high, suggesting there are
few economic barriers to accessing a cycle, cycling on journeys to
school still remains minimal at around 2%, similar to the national
average. However, almost half of children aged 9–14 from disadvantaged 
areas cycle in their leisure time. This study has shown
for the <U+FB01>rst time that whilst cycling is relatively common and popular 
amongst 9–14 year old children in these areas there are considerable 
differences between ethnic groups, with much lower
bike ownership in Asian and African families. Young Asians and
Africans are more likely to report that they do not own or have
never ridden a bicycle. It is not entirely clear what social, economic
or environmental factors explain these differences or how this
should be addressed; a social marketing approach may be best suited 
to understand the issues that underpin this <U+FB01>nding (Smith,
2006).
Our research and that of others (e.g. Kamphuis et al., 2007)
clearly shows that social factors such as parental perception of risk

combine with poor quality environments to create a barrier against
children cycling. Parent’s fears for their children’s safety are
strongly held and whilst they acknowledged their children’s desire
to cycle they felt they could not allow this because of hazardous
traf<U+FB01>c environments and the perception that their children were
not skilled enough to cope with these hazards. Furthermore, cycling 
to school was not encouraged for the reasons above and because 
it was felt that there were not enough secure cycle storage
facilities at school to deter theft. Such parental concerns about
safety have also been shown to in<U+FB02>uence modal choice for school
journeys in other countries (Lang et al., 2010).These <U+FB01>ndings echo
the results of other studies which show that parental fears of safety
combine with young people’s own perceptions and produce a barrier 
to cycling as a means of active transport (Carver et al., 2008).
However, there are opportunities to consider a holistic approach 
to improving the prevalence and safety of cycling in disadvantaged 
areas addressing the role of wider social, economic, and
environmental factors. Around a third of younger children (aged
9–10) said they would prefer to cycle to school than use any other
mode. This opportunity to increase cycling is unlikely to be realised
unless parental fears are addressed by improving the safety of the
road environment. Within residential areas the speed and volume
of traf<U+FB01>c needs to be reduced so that they become less hostile for
cyclists, this needs to be addressed through engineering and
enforcement. There is evidence that the rates of child casualties
are reduced by area wide traf<U+FB01>c-calming (Cloke et al., 1999;
Mackie et al., 1990; Wheeler and Taylor, 2000; Jones et al., 2005)
and that 20mph zones may reduce child road casualty rates for
both child pedestrians and child pedal cyclists (Grundy et al.,
2008; Webster and Lay<U+FB01>eld, 2003; Grayling et al., 2002; Webster
and Mackie, 1996; Lay<U+FB01>eld et al., 2005; Tilly et al., 2005; Webster
et al., 2005). There is also evidence from USA that safe routes to
school (SRTS) programmes based on engineering measures may reduce 
child casualty rates as pedestrians or cyclists (Gutierrez et al.,
2008; Blomberg et al., 2008). Children want to take their bikes to
parks and play areas so more could be done to ensure that there
are accessible and safe cycle routes to these destinations. These
could also be good venues to deliver cycle maintenance or safety
initiatives such as promoting cycle helmet wearing which have
been shown to reduce head injuries among children (Sethi,
2008). Also, within these areas it may be possible to create cycle
paths or circuits to encourage cycling, especially by the younger
children.
One social factor that needs to be addressed relates to the anti-social 
behaviour of drivers and riders in local neighbourhoods. Research 
to reduce child pedestrian casualties has showed that
interventions that combine both engineering measures and
enforcement show the greatest impact on child casualties (Van
Houten and Malenfant, 2004). Given the high levels of anti social
driving in disadvantaged areas (Clarke et al., 2008; Knox et al.,
2003) police enforcement is critical to improving the safety of
neighbourhoods for children as cyclists and pedestrians. Another
social factor that needs to be addressed is improving the skills of
children as cyclists which may help to improve parent’s con<U+FB01>dence
in their children’s ability to deal with the traf<U+FB01>c environment. The
cycling behaviour of children could be improved by cycle skills
training delivered through schools. A targeted approach is needed
to deliver cycling skills courses such as the national scheme Bike-ability 
http://www.dft.gov.uk/bikeability/ in areas of disadvantage
in the same way that pedestrian training skills (http://www.kerb-
craft.org/) have been successfully delivered in these areas (Whelan
et al., 2008). However, currently there is a charge for this cycle
course and this may provide an economic barrier to uptake
amongst disadvantaged children. There may be opportunities to
provide family bike training to encourage a shared approach to
safety. Similarly, if parents are concerned about cycle theft then


secure cycle storage facilities need to be available near the key destinations 
where children travel (i.e. school and shops). This would
address an economic barrier for cycling to school.
From a holistic perspective addressing the opportunities and
barriers for children as cyclists in disadvantaged areas will need
a range of stakeholders to work in partnership. These need to include 
road safety departments, those with a responsibility for providing 
safe and secure parks, the police, youth workers, schools and
those responsible for promoting active transport for health and
environmental sustainability. Most importantly, these stakeholders 
need to engage with the community, including hearing the
voices and views of the children who wish to cycle. It is partnership
approaches involving a range of agencies that have been identi<U+FB01>ed
as being the most effective in reducing injuries (Crombie, 2002).
Finally, to fully understand the impact of any of these suggested 
interventions there needs to a systematic approach to monitoring 
and evaluation (NICE, 2010) so that the costs (injuries) and
bene<U+FB01>ts (improved health and access to facilities) of increasing cycling 
activity among children in disadvantaged neighbourhoods
can be understood, exploring the differential effects among ethnic
groups.

5. Conclusions

A holistic approach has proved useful in understanding the
opportunities and barriers for cycling in disadvantaged areas and

in terms of economic, social and environmental factors. There is
no clear evidence that children in disadvantaged areas cycle more
or less than children in the rest of England so this does not explain
high levels of casualties in these areas. However, this report shows
that cycling does vary with ethnic origin with around a third of
children from an Asian background having never ridden a bike.
The greatest opportunity for increasing cycling is that young children 
want to cycle. The greatest barriers to increasing cycling is
the hazardous traf<U+FB01>c environment and antisocial driving and riding
in disadvantaged neighbourhoods. This can be mitigated by taking
a multiagency approach involving education, enforcement and
engineering. This study provides information for local authorities
in disadvantaged areas to show where children use their cycles
so that they can help improve safe access to these destinations
for cyclists. Until the real and perceived safety of the road environment 
is addressed it is unlikely that levels of cycling will increase
in these areas, despite the strong preferences of children to travel
by bike. The scale of the inequality in bicycle ownership and use
among children from different ethnic groups is another important
public health issue. The issues underlying these differences need to
be explored further.