Effects of a Danish multicomponent physical activity intervention
on active school transport
abstract
Introduction: Walking and bicycling to school yields great potential in increasing the physical activity
levels of adolescents, but to date very few intervention studies have been evaluated. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the effect of a multicomponent school-based physical activity intervention on adolescent
active school transport (AST) and three intermediate outcomes: perceived school route safety, parent
support and attitude towards bicycling.
Methods: In total, 1014 adolescents at 14 schools filled in a transport diary at baseline and at a two-year
follow-up and were included in the primary outcome analysis. Mean age at baseline was 12.6 years(range: 11.0–14.4 years). Seven of the schools were randomized to the intervention which was designed
to change the organizational and structural environment at the schools, thereby increasing non-curricular physical activity i.e. recess activity, active transport and after-school fitness program. Transport
mode to school was assessed through a 5-day transportation diary.Results: The proportion of active transport was high at baseline (86.0%) and was maintained at the two-
year follow-up (87.0%). There was no difference in active travel between the intervention and the
comparison schools after the intervention, but more students perceived parental encouragement and
had a positive attitude towards bicycling at the intervention schools. This difference was however only
borderline significant.
Conclusion: The prevalence of AST was high at both baseline and follow-up, but no difference between
the intervention and comparison schools was detected. Future intervention research should ensure a
high degree of involvement of students, teachers and parents, focus merely on AST and take advantage ofalready planned physical environment changes in well-designed natural experiments.
1. Introduction
     The health benefits of walking and bicycling for transport are widely accepted and scientifically supported (Bauman et al., 2011;
Davison et al., 2008), and active school transport (AST), defined as physical active commuting to and from school, has been proposed as a
way to decrease obesity rates among children and adolescents (Faulkner et al., 2009; Lubans et al., 2011). Several other benefits associated
with AST have also been reported e.g. independent mobility and cognitive functions (Martínez-Gómez et al., 2011; Mitra, 2013). If the
proposed tracking of active transport to adulthood is strong (Tudor-Locke et al., 2001; Wong et al., 2011), the benefits for society will be
magnified in terms of decreasing the negative side effects of automobile transport e.g. greenhouse-gas emission and congestion, while at
the same time contributing to more lively neighborhoods (Gehl, 2010; Woodcock et al., 2009).
     In a review of interventions promoting AST, 14 studies were included and only one of those was targeted students older than 12 years
(Chillon et al., 2011). Due to a large variation in intervention programs, the review categorized the initiatives according to the Active Living
by Design (ALbD) 5P model: preparation, promotion, programs, policy and physical projects (Bors et al., 2009). The ALbD model builds on
an ecological framework (Sallis et al., 1998) and suggests that initiatives are most successful if all 5Ps are incorporated, i.e. that changes to
policy and the physical environment occur together with more traditional information and education initiatives (promotion and
programs), and that these initiatives are supported by collaborating partnerships from various fields (preparation phase) (Bors et al.,
2009). However only two studies incorporated all 5P’s, and four other studies incorporated changes to the physical environment or to the
school policy. The remaining eight studies used preparation, programs and promotion initiatives. Most studies reported an increase in AST,
but in general the effect sizes were small, and due to large variation no clear recommendations could be made to increase the effectiveness
of future interventions. Therefore, the review emphasized the need for high-quality evaluations of AST interventions, and especially
interventions targeting adolescents. Future studies were furthermore encouraged to evaluate proposed intermediate outcomes based on
theoretical frameworks of behavioral change (Chillon et al., 2011). One potential intermediate outcome could be the perception of route
safety, which is a shared element of most presented frameworks (McMillan, 2005; Ogilvie et al., 2011; Panter et al., 2008). It includes both
the objective traffic route safety and the abilities and perceptions of the individual. Another important intermediate outcome is the
encouragement or support from parents, which also has been incorporated in two relevant frameworks for AST (McMillan, 2005; Panter et
al., 2008). In the framework by Panter et al. (2008) it is described as a decision-making process in which both parents and the child have
influence on the final choice. The attitude towards active transport could also be affected by an intervention, and is also interconnected to
other factors. Panter et al. (2008) hypothesized that a positive attitude towards AST will prompt a more positive perception of the route
safety, but one could also propose that the relationship is reciprocal i.e. that a safe route will cause a positive attitude towards AST and
active transport in general (Sirard and Slater, 2008).
     AST is very common in Denmark and a representative study from 1998 to 2000 showed that approximately 60% of children aged 11–15
years cycled and 20% walked to school. The high levels of AST has been ascribed to a long lasting effort to develop and maintain safe route
to school, active transport education at the schools, and systematic promotion by lobby organizations (Jensen, 2008). A typical Danish
public school has 300–500 students from 6 to 16 years, and half of them has less than 1.5 km to school (Jensen, 2008). Even though there
are good conditions for AST in Denmark, the romantic presentation of a country where even most 5-year olds children cycle to school is
overstated (Fotel and Thyra, 2004). The prevalence of children walking and cycling to school have decreased the last 30 years, as in the rest
of the world, but among 11–15 year olds it is still considerable higher than in most other countries (Fyhri et al., 2011).
     The primary objective of the current study is to evaluate whether the multicomponent intervention was effective in increasing or
preventing a decrease in AST. In addition we investigate intervention effect on perceived route safety, parental encouragement and student
attitude towards bicycling. Finally, we investigate if gender, baseline AST, perceived environment, distance to school, parental
encouragement and objective walkability of the school site moderate the intervention effect.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Design and study population
     The study is based on data from the multicomponent intervention SPACE—for physical activity. The intervention is a comprehensive
school-based intervention to improve non-curricular PA through changes of the physical and organizational environment supported by
educational activities. It has a cluster randomized controlled design, and is described in detail elsewhere (Toftager et al., 2011). After an
open invitation 21 schools in the Region of Southern Denmark enrolled in 2009, and to improve the homogeneity between the
intervention and control group the schools were analyzed and matched pairwise according to eight variables i.e. Euclidean distance from
residence to school for 5th and 6th graders; area household income; area education level; area ethnicity distribution; school district
urbanity; condition and characteristics of school outdoor areas; school health policy; and active transport in the local area. The seven most
identical pairs of schools were then randomized one by one to the comparison or intervention group (Toftager et al., 2011).
     Baseline measurements with questionnaires and diaries were obtained in spring 2010 from the 5th and 6th grade in all 14 schools, with
follow-up measurements at almost the same week in 2012 in the 7th and 8th grade (Fig. 1). The transport diary and web-based
questionnaire were pilot-tested prior to the main data collection including cognitive interview validation (Collins, 2003; Toftager et al.,
2011). Data collection was conducted in pairs (one intervention school and one comparison school at the same time) to minimize the
in<U+FB02>uence of season and weather conditions. Parents and students received written information about the study, and were informed that
participation was voluntary. We used a passive informed consent procedure, where students were included unless the parents withdrew
consent. This procedure has been found to be ethically appropriate in low-risk research in adolescents (Santelli et al., 2003). The Danish
National Committee on Health Research Ethics reviewed the study protocol and concluded that formal approval was not required. The
study is registered and listed in the Danish Data Protection Agency (reference number: 2009-41-3628) and registered in the Current
Controlled Trials (ISRCTN79122411).
2.2. Intervention
     The intervention package comprised 11 components targeting non-curricular PA, i.e. recess PA, after-school fitness program and active
transport. Schools and municipalities were requested and supported to implement all 11 components, but there were no defined criteria to
exclude schools with incomplete implementation. A detailed description of the intervention components was delivered to all participating
schools, with the possibility for smaller individual adjustments and tailoring to the local context. All 11 components and details of
implementation are described in detail elsewhere (Toftager et al., 2011). However, the components targeting active transport are
elaborated in the following.
     Four components were directly targeting active transport, and could be divided into policy, programs and physical initiative according
to the ALbD model (Bors et al., 2009). The implementation of the interventions began simultaneously in autumn 2010. The policy initiative
consisted of formulating and implementing a school PA policy, including active travel to school, which was implemented at all
intervention schools. Examples of the content of the PA policy targeting AST were: (1) encouraging parents to minimize school transport
by car, practice active transport to school and be active transport role models; (2) endorse traffic education initiatives for all age groups at
the school and use active travel in educational settings; (3) goal setting for active transport and a declaration of intent to work with
municipalities and other stakeholders to improve the safety of the environment for AST.
    The program initiatives included two components, which were educating and training students in safe cycling; and establishing a school
traffic patrol, with older students helping younger students to cross the streets near the school. All participating schools had cyclist
education already running, as was the school traffic patrol at four intervention schools and five comparison schools. For the three
intervention schools without traffic patrol, there were no appropriate crossings in close proximity to the school, which made the
component less relevant to implement.
    The physical initiative comprised physical changes to improve safety for active transport. The improvement of the cycling infrastructure
was met in two schools, but lack of financial support precluded implementation at the remaining five schools. The physical improvements
at the two schools were: a short cycle path near the school separating cyclists from cars, speed humps, a new parking area further away
from school and 30 cycles to use for educational purposes.
    One more P for preparation could be added, since the intervention was supported by a cross-disciplinary network consisting of
teachers, school leaders, municipality consultants and the research team coordinated by a project manager from the Region of Southern
Denmark. Altogether the initiatives should both enhance safety en route to school, improve the cycling abilities of the students, and raise
the awareness of the benefits of AST in both students and parents.
3. Calculation
3.1. Primary outcome
    The variables used in the analyses are presented in Table 1. AST was assessed using 5-day active commuting diaries, which were filled
in for the previous day at the first lesson the next morning. Transport mode for each trip to or from school was dichotomized to active
transport all way (bicycling, walking, skating) or passive transport (driving by bus, train or car). The primary outcome was binomial and
defined as x active trips out of n reported trips (max. possible trips n = 10). To be included in the analyses a student should have reported at
least 4 trips at both baseline and follow-up.
3.2. Intermediate outcomes and effect modifiers
    The exact wording of the question and response options of the three intermediate outcomes are presented in Table 1. The question
about route safety was specific to bicycling, so students who never cycled (10.6%) did not answer that question. Following effect modifiers
were tested: gender, perceived route safety, parental encouragement, baseline AST status, distance to school and school walkability.
In short, the school walkability consists of three objectively measured urban form characteristics: road connectivity, vehicular traffic
exposure and residential density. The 14 schools were divided into low, medium and high walkability according to the summed index
(Christiansen et al., 2014). Baseline AST status was binary and defined as positive if all trips at baseline were active. Distance to school was
measured on the pedestrian enhanced network (GIS) and dichotomized to living within 2 km from school or not. Gender and age were
obtained through school records (Table 1).
3.3. Statistical analysis
    The statistical analyses were based on the intention-to-treat principle and results are reported at the level of the individual student. The
effect of the intervention was evaluated using multilevel logistic regression, which accounted for the clustering of observations within schools.
The number of active trips out of all reported trips at follow-up was specified as the binomial outcome in the primary effect analysis, and
intervention versus comparison as the independent variable. Analyses were adjusted for differences in age, gender, distance to school, and
proportion of active transport at baseline (number of active trips divided by number of all reported trips at baseline). The effect of the
intervention on the three intermediate outcomes was assessed similarly but without the binomial option. To interpret the variation between
the 14 schools an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was calculated as ICC = s22 =s21 þ s22 , where s22 is the variance between schools (second-
level variance) and s21 is the variance between individuals approximated as s21 = p 2 =3 (Goldstein et al., 2002). Effect modification was
explored by adding one interaction term at a time in the multilevel model. Likelihood-ratio tests were performed to determine whether the
inclusion of the interactions significantly improved the prediction of the likelihood of AST (Cervero, 2002; McMillan, 2007). Analyses were
performed using STATA version 12 and a 5% significance level.
4. Results
4.1. Study participation
    Fig. 1 shows the flow of participants in the study. At baseline 1348 students were enrolled at the 14 schools and 1311 filled in the web-
based questionnaire and 1279 students filled in the transport diary for at least four trips. At follow-up 157 students had moved to another
school, 22 students had withdrawn consent and additionally 86 students did not <U+FB01>ll in the transport diary for at least four trips. Thus, 1014
students had at least four reported trips at both baseline and follow-up and were included in the primary analysis of AST based on the
transport diary (response rate of 75.2%). The average number of reported trips was 9.4 at baseline and 9.0 at follow-up, and 81% of the
included students had eight or more trips reported at both time points. In total 1060 students filled in the questionnaire at baseline and
follow-up and were included in the analyses of the intermediate outcomes (response rate of 78.6%).
    Comparisons of the students with sufficient transport diary data (n ¼ 1014) with the students who were lost to follow-up (n ¼265)
showed that the lost-to-follow-up group was 0.2 years older (p o0.001), but otherwise no differences regarding gender, distance to school
or AST at baseline were detected (data not shown).
4.2. Characteristics of study participants at baseline
    Characteristics of the participating students at baseline in the intervention and comparison groups are presented in Table 2, followed
by the distribution of reported trips. Age and gender were similarly distributed in the two groups, as was the proportion of overweight
students. Approximately three out of four students were living within 2 km of school, nearly half perceived parental encouragement for
cycling to school, and more than nine out of ten enjoyed cycling with only minor differences between the groups. In total, 88.8% of the
students at the intervention schools perceived their route to school as safe or very safe compared to 83.8% in the comparison schools.
    The distribution of trips showed some differences between the groups. The overall proportion of active trips was high for both groups,
but higher at the intervention schools (88.4%) compared to the comparison schools (83.7%). The proportion of trips by foot was higher at
the comparison school (15.5% vs. 11.1%), but the proportion of trips by bicycle was considerably lower (68.2% vs. 77.3%).
4.3. Change in AST and intermediate outcomes
    The changes in AST, perceived route safety, parental encouragement and attitude towards bicycling are presented in Table 3. Both the
intervention and comparison group increased the proportion of active trips by approximately one percentage point (%p), with no
significant difference between groups (OR: 1.27 95% CI 0.81–1.99). There was some variations among schools, as nine schools remained
near baseline level; three schools increased AST by 2.4%p, 7.0%p and 10.6%p, while two schools decreased the level of AST by 4.0%p and
8.8%p. At the four schools with the lowest walkability index the average proportion of AST increased from 76.9% to 81.4% on average, while
it remained unchanged at 88.9% at the ten schools with medium or high walkability (data not shown).
    The proportion of students feeling safe or very safe en route to school decreased from 93.4% to 90.5% in the intervention group and
increased in the comparison group from 87.2% to 88.9%, but this difference was insignificant (OR 0.87 95% CI 0.50–1.51). For the last two
intermediate outcome variables the results indicated a change in the desired direction, although non-significant. A total of 55.7% of the
students perceived encouragement for bicycling in the intervention group at follow-up compared with 50.8% in the comparison group
(OR: 1.26 95% CI 0.92–1.73, p-value ¼0.15) and 88.9% in the intervention group compared to 84.6% in the comparison group had a positive
attitude towards bicycling at follow-up (OR 1.50 95% CI 0.90–2.50, p-value ¼0.12).
4.4. Change in AST by subgroups
    Subgroup analysis was conducted for the following groups: perceived route safety (safe vs. unsafe), parental encouragement (encourage
cycling vs. not encourage cycling), gender (girls vs. boys), distance to school (o2 km vs. Z2 km), school walkability (low walkability vs.
medium and high walkability) and baseline AST status (all active trips vs. not all active trips). Only the perceived route safety interaction showed
a significant improvement when added to the model. The students reporting an unsafe route to school at baseline were more likely to use AST at
follow-up in the intervention group compared to the students with an unsafe route in the comparison group (OR 2.69 95% CI 1.20–6.07),
whereas there were no differences between the students reporting a safe route to school at baseline. The proportion of active trips for the
students with a perceived safe route was close to 90% for both intervention and comparison group at both time points, whereas the students
with a perceived unsafe route to school AST increased from 56.0% to 61.0% in the comparison group and from 70.1% to 78.9% in the intervention
group. The proportion of AST also increased more for students living further than 2 km away (54.0% to 62.5%) as presented in Fig. 2.
Furthermore, there were also detected a small increase for students who were attending a school with a low walkability index (76.9% to 81.4%),
not perceiving encouragement from parents (84.8% to 86.2%) and for boys (85.1% to 87.4%), whereas their counterparts remained unchanged.
These increases were similar for both the comparison and intervention group, thus no significant intervention modifications had occurred. At
baseline 69.8% of the students used AST on all trips, and this group had a proportion of AST at follow-up on 95.4%. The students, who used mixed
transport mode at baseline, increased their proportion of active trips from 53.7% to 67.9% (data not shown).
5. Discussion
5.1. Main Findings
    The objective of the study was to (1) evaluate the overall intervention effect on AST, (2) evaluate the intervention effect on three
intermediate outcomes, and (3) investigate potential effect moderators. The level of AST was high at baseline in all schools and had
increased marginally at the two-year follow up with no difference between groups. There was no group difference in perceived safety en
route to school, however, parental encouragement and positive attitude towards bicycling was higher at the intervention schools although
not significant. Subgroup analyses showed that students in the intervention group with a perceived unsafe route to school increased their
proportion of AST significantly more than their counterparts at the comparison schools.
5.2. Reasons for lack of effect
    The reasons for not finding an effect on AST caused by the current intervention could be ascribed to a combination of design,
implementation feasibility and the venue of the intervention. Regarding the design the review by Chillon et al. (2011) suggest that
interventions focusing solely on AST might be more effective than those with a broad focus on PA in several arenas, and that effective
interventions are able to achieve a high level of involvement of both school employees and parents. The current intervention had a broad
focus on non-curricular PA and did not systematically involve parents. Regarding the implementation feasibility the lack of effect could
also be explained by the fact that only two out of the seven intervention schools changed their physical environment. Post hoc analysis of
AST of the two schools with environment changes did not, however, indicate a higher impact. Finally, the venue of the interventions could
also explain the lack of effect, as AST was very high at baseline and two of the intervention components targeting AST were already
implemented at both intervention and comparison schools. The proportion of passive trips was14.1% at baseline, and of those 26.9% were
shorter than 2 km. Thus only 3.8% of all trips were passive trips within 2 km, which would be easier to convert to active trips. The ICC of
AST was 9.8% at baseline decreasing to 7.6% at follow-up, indicating that the difference between the 14 schools decreased, which was
confirmed as the schools with lowest baseline AST improved the most, irrespective of whether the school belonged to the intervention or
the comparison group. This could imply that factors at the school level, such as the physical environment, are more important in the
younger years, and supports the theory that children are building their independent mobility through a maturations process including
skill acquisition related to the environment and social interaction with friends (Kullman, 2010). Longitudinal research has however also
found a more varying picture, as there was observed both increase and decrease in AST at the school level after a two-year follow-up (Wen
et al., 2008).
5.3. Positive trends in potential intermediate outcomes
    The positive trend in parental encouragement and attitude towards bicycling must be acknowledged, as an increase in these two
factors can influence the tracking of active transport behavior from youth to adulthood. The results were not significant, but the
confidence intervals indicate a minor effect of the intervention (Hackshaw and Kirkwood, 2011). This minor effect could be attributed to
the increased awareness of the bene<U+FB01>ts of PA and AST through both the intervention project itself and the implementation of the school PA
policy. The subgroup analyses of six potential moderators showed that the intervention had an effect on the group of students with a
perceived unsafe route to school at baseline. This effect can partly be explained by the fact that more students in the intervention group
with an unsafe route at baseline changed perception of their route to safe at follow-up. At the same time, though, the overall prevalence of
students with a perceived safe route to school decreased slightly from 93.4% to 90.5% in the intervention group, meaning that more
students with a perceived safe route at baseline changed their perception to unsafe. The proportion of students feeling safe en route to
school was however still much higher than found in an Australian study, were less than half indicated safe route (Trapp et al., 2012). Living
further than 2 km away, having a perceived unsafe route to school, not having encouraging parents and attending a school with a low
walkability index was associated with a lower proportion of AST but also a larger increase in AST from baseline to follow-up. This supports
the before mentioned effect of the maturation process on the perception of an acceptable AST environment.
5.4. Strengths and limitations
    This effect evaluation of a multicomponent intervention to improve AST demonstrates a strong and comprehensive design according to
a previous published intervention evaluation quality assessment instrument (Thomas et al., 2004). It is considered as a strength that
baseline participation rate was well above 80%, and follow-rate was very close to 80%. It was a randomized controlled design, and analyses
were adjusted for gender, age, and distance to school, which are the most relevant confounders. Analyses of both intermediate outcomes
and effect moderators inspired from published frameworks were conducted. The diary method to assess travel behavior has previously
been used to validate traditional recall questionnaire items (Cerin et al., 2012), and by analyzing the binomial outcome (active or passive
trips out of total possible trips) the sensitivity and precision of the data were preserved. Validity of all items in the questionnaire and
transport diary were assessed using cognitive interviews in a pilot study with similar age groups prior to the main data collection (Collins,
2003; Toftager et al., 2011). Furthermore, the high completion rate of the transport diaries supports this method as a feasible way of
collecting reliable data while retaining diversity of travel behavior.
    There are several limitations of the study. First of all, it is possible that the diary method may have caused a reactive effect and
contributed to the very high level of AST in both groups. Furthermore, self-report measures are always associated with uncertainty. In this
study it is especially applicable for the intermediate outcomes, and future studies should refine methods to better assess intermediate
outcomes of AST interventions. Second, schools had to enlist for participation in the study, and the majority of students at the schools
should live within 2 km from school and be of Danish ethnicity, for which reason the participation schools are not representative of the
population of all Danish schools and thus the external validity of the study is reduced. Third, a limitation is the complexity of the
intervention and the heterogeneity in implementation, which increases the difficulties in setting a definite conclusion. As for previous
comprehensive studies, it was challenging to implement all components of the intervention, especially the environmental improvements
(Bors et al., 2009). Two other components were already implemented at both intervention and comparison schools, and the implemented
components were not assessed for quality or for perceived impact on the students or parents.
6. Conclusions
    This study is one of the first intervention studies to investigate the effect of a whole-school approach to AST in European older children.
There was no detectable intervention effect on AST, but there was an indication of an effect on parental encouragement and student
attitude towards bicycling. In light of the implementation, these results are reasonable, as the active ingredient almost entirely consisted of
increased awareness of the benefits of PA and AST caused by the project itself and the movement policy. In 5th and 6th grade the AST was
already high in most schools, and this was maintained at the two-year follow-up. This argues for a potential ceiling effect.
    Future intervention studies could replicate the four components of this study, in schools with a lower initial AST and fewer
implemented AST initiatives. Further actions for involving teachers, students and parents in the movement policy formulation and
implementation should be taken, and including promotion on a regular basis in the community, so all five Ps (preparation, promotion,
programs, policy and physical projects) from the ALbD model are implemented. Physical projects improving the environment for AST
demand a high degree of political involvement and support, and such projects take a long time from proposal to implementation.
Therefore, well-planned natural experiments focusing on AST supported by engagement of local authorities can form the basis for solid
knowledge of promoting active transportation for the generations to come.