Gender Differences in School
and Work Commuting Mode
Through the Life Cycle
Exploring Trends in the Greater Toronto
and Hamilton Area, 1986 to 2011

abstract
Reducing auto dependence and increasing the use of active and sustainable 
modes of transportation for school and work travel are necessary 
for alleviating traffic congestion issues that are typical in today’s
North American cities and regions. While there is a growing interest in
increasing the use of active and sustainable modes of travel for commuter 
trips in transportation planning, less attention has been paid in
practice to gender differences in travel demand. This descriptive study
explores gender differences in active transportation, public transit,
and automobile use through the life cycle to assess temporal changes
in gendered transport over the past 25 years in the greater Toronto
and Hamilton area, Canada. Findings suggest that female children and
youths are driven to school more frequently than males; however, males
drive more than females during the years of labor force participation.
Differences between female and male automobile use increase with age,
but the gender gap has declined since the mid-1980s. Factors such as
having one vehicle per household, more than six household members,
and living and working in the city of Toronto are shown to associate with
the largest differences in driving between full-time employed women and
men. Distances between home and work have increased, particularly
for women, and the percentage of women with a driver’s license has
increased. Although driving remains higher for men than women during 
the part of the life course that includes labor force participation, the
gender gap in active transportation, public transit, and automobile use
appears to be lower today than in the mid-1980s.

The traffic congestion that plagues much of the urbanized Global
North typically produces traffic environments that are unsafe and
costly for individuals of all ages. Congestion during peak commuting
hours creates a financial burden on cities and regions because of the
productivity costs of time lost to long commutes and the direct and
indirect costs associated with motor vehicle injuries and fatalities.
To alleviate these issues, a reduction in automobile dependence and
an increase in the use of active and sustainable modes of transportation 
such as walking, cycling, and public transit is required during

daily school and work commutes. While there is growing interest in
increasing levels of active transportation for school and work travel
in transportation planning practice, inadequate attention has been
given to gender differences in daily travel and how gender roles
relate to mobility. The regional transportation plan for the greater
Toronto and Hamilton area, Canada, The Big Move, envisions that
one third of work trips will be taken by transit and one in five trips
will be taken by active modes of transportation (e.g., walking and
cycling) by 2031 (1). This regional plan aims to facilitate an increase
in sustainable modes for daily travel; however, mention of gender
differences in mobility is largely absent.
In this paper, gender is acknowledged as a social construct that
transcends the typical male–female gender binary. Measurement,
however, because of the use of secondary data, is limited to the often
used male–female, men–women, and boy–girl category labels.
These terms are used as a tool to connect this study to other research
where gender has been similarly essentialized without nuanced
consideration of its construction. The social construction of gender 
and the role of girls and women in society affect the mobility
patterns of females through the life cycle, a process that arguably
begins in childhood.
For children and youths, active school transport (AST), such
as walking or cycling to school, provides an opportunity for daily
physical activity that may help to reduce the risk of overweight and
obesity while protecting against the onset of chronic disease later
in life (2–5). Despite the potential health benefits, North American
research suggests that AST has decreased in recent decades (6–8),
with girls less likely to engage in AST than boys (9, 10). This gender
gap in school travel could be related to parental risk perceptions associated 
with female independent travel and a contemporary model of
good parenting in much of the Global North that is characterized by
a high level of child supervision by adults (10–14).
Research into commuting mode choice for adults also indicates
differences in the travel behavior of men and women. The term
“mode choice” implies that there is an option for women and men
to make decisions about their travel patterns, but historically women
have had reduced access to certain modes of transportation and lower
daily mobility when compared with men. Research on gender and
transport reveals that gender and class norms dictate the level
of mobility, or immobility, of women (15). While some argue that
gender disparities have decreased since the early twentieth century,
women’s automobile use has remained lower than men’s (16). Men’s

access to private cars increases their freedom and flexibility, facilitates 
efficient and time-sensitive travel, and creates opportunities to
travel to new and often more distant destinations. Women, however,
often rely on alternative modes of travel that may limit their mobility,
contributing to a reproduction of gender inequalities with regard to
employment and household responsibilities.
Research shows that women’s mobility is not only affected by
male-dominated automobile use, but also by household responsibilities 
often associated with motherhood. By 1990, there were more
families with two working parents than those with a working father
and a stay-at-home mother (17). Many households had two parents
who traveled to and from work each day, took children to and from
school, and incorporated other activities and trips related to running
a household into their schedules (17). Journey-to-work research
indicates that women typically traveled shorter distances to employment 
than men (17–22). Reasons for these shorter distances have
been shown to include income, domestic responsibilities that women
conduct on a daily basis, access to transport, and labor market segmentation 
(23). Women tend to make more trips for a wider variety
of purposes, develop more trip chains (i.e., stop at one or more locations 
before arriving at a destination), have more multimodal trips
(i.e., the use of two or more modes of travel for one trip), and have
shorter trips than men (24). Despite increased labor force participation 
during and since World War II, the activities and travel related
to childcare, shopping, and other household errands remain largely
carried out by women. Complex patterns of activity and travel
demand exist for women as they enter and experience child-rearing
stages of life associated with generally carrying out a wider range of
unpaid labor.
The increased labor force participation of women during the past
several decades may have affected the ways in which household
responsibilities and transportation decisions are negotiated. This
study examines gender differences in active transportation, public
transit, and automobile use through the life cycle, with a view to
identifying changes in gendered mobility in recent decades. This
descriptive piece explores three main research questions: (a) How
does the gender gap in school and work travel change as individuals
age? (b) How does the gender gap in school and work travel today
differ from that of the past (i.e., from 1986 to 2011)? and (c) How
do household characteristics and factors such as distance and licensing
associate with gender differences in commuter mode share? The
remainder of the paper is organized into four sections. The first section 
outlines the study area, data, and methods employed. Research
findings are then presented, with a focus on the interplay between
gender and age, household characteristics, distance, and licensing.
Findings are then discussed in terms of how they relate to the complex
social construction of gender in society.

Methods

Study Area and Data
This study was situated in Canada’s largest metropolitan region, the
greater Toronto and Hamilton area, and used data drawn from the
Transportation Tomorrow Survey (TTS). The TTS is a repeat cross-section 
household travel survey collected with a computer-assisted
telephone interview (CATI) procedure for one weekday in the fall
of each survey year. The TTS has been conducted every five years
since 1986 and includes questions related to school and work travel
as well as personal and household characteristics. The survey represents 
a 5% random sample (4.2% in 1986) for the city of Toronto
and surrounding region. This study used elementary, secondary, and
postsecondary school trip data and full-time work trip data for five
study years over a 25-year period (1986, 1996, 2001, 2006, and 2011)
across six regional municipalities (Durham, Halton, Hamilton, Peel,
York, and Toronto). Survey year 1991 is excluded because in that
year the survey included only areas with rapid growth since 1986. A
census-based expansion factor was used to produce population level
travel data. Population weighted expansion numbers were used to
calculate mode share.

Age and Gender

Because the TTS collects only data for household members above
age 11, 11- to 13-year-olds are used to represent elementary school
students, and 14 to 17-year-olds are used to represent secondary
school adolescents. This age classification method is used to expose
any differences in travel mode share among elementary and secondary
students. The 18- to 24-year-old age category is used for data related
to both postsecondary school trips and full-time work trips. The
Association of Universities and Colleges Canada considers 18 to 24
to be the key youth age range for enrollment in postsecondary education 
(25). This age group marks the last school trip age category
(i.e., postsecondary trips) and the first work-age category (i.e., full-time work trips). 
The full-time work-age categories are based on
Census of Canada age groupings that divide the population into
5-year intervals. Gender is essentialized as male or female on the
basis of the response of the individual being surveyed or the family
member who responded on behalf of all members of the household.
For this reason, the gender indicated for children and youths may
reflect the gender that has been ascribed to them by a parent or
guardian rather than the gender with which they identify.

School and Employment Status

Trip data for school and work were extracted to reflect the daily
mobility patterns of children, youths, and adults. Children, youths,
and young adults of ages 11 to 17 and 18 to 24 must be considered 
full-time students to be included in this study, and workers
(18- to 24 years old and 25 years and older) must have full-time
employment status. This enables comparisons between the travel
patterns of females and males who have similar school and work
circumstances. In this study, work is defined as full-time paid
labor outside the home. Part-time workers were not included in this
analysis because of the different activity, scheduling, and travel
context associated with part-time employment or hours, particularly 
the timing at which part-time commuting occurs. The focus
on school and work trips allows for a greater understanding of
gendered mobility patterns on a daily basis rather than for unique
discretionary trips.

Results

School and work trip-mode shares for all age categories by gender
and year are shown in Figure 1. In this figure, “GO Transit” refers
to the use of the interregional transit system that offers bus and train
services in and between regions of the greater Toronto and Hamilton
area. This differs from municipality-focused “local transit” services.

These two categories are combined in Figure 2 to represent total
public transit use. Similarly, the automobile mode-share used to
explore gender differences includes trips where the respondent was
either a driver or passenger of a personal vehicle (Figure 3). The
purpose of combining driver and passenger trip types was to trace
changes in automobile use through life-cycle stages beginning in

childhood, where children are passengers (e.g., a parent, sibling,
or guardian). The gender gap in mode share in Figures 2, 3, and 4
is expressed as the difference between female and male mode share
(Figures 2–4). A positive value indicates greater female than male
mode share. The gender gap in automobile use during working years,
therefore, refers to the higher automobile mode share for men than
for women.

Gender and Age

Active and Public Transportation

Over the past few decades, AST has declined for children and youths,
but has decreased more for females than for males. In 1986, 57.4%
of females and 57.9% of males 11- to 13 years old walked or cycled
to school; whereas, only 41.2% of females and 45.1% of males used
active modes of transportation in 2011 (Figure 1). The more rapid
decrease in walking and cycling for females than for males indicates 
a widening of an AST gender gap. The most recent surve
data reveals that boys are 3.9% more likely to travel using active
modes, an increase from 0.5% in 1986 (Figure 2). Similar results are
observed for 14- to 17-year-old students, who have also experienced 
a decline in walking and cycling since 1986, particularly
females. Public transit use for elementary and secondary school travel
has decreased slightly for both males and females (Figure 1). There
does not appear to be a substantial gender gap in public transit during
these years (Figure 2).
For postsecondary students and full-time workers in the 18 to
24 year age group, active transportation has decreased from 9.6%
to 7.6% (Figure 1). The general trend in active transportation for the
adult work commute suggests that women are more likely than men
to travel to full-time employment using active modes. The gender gap

in active transportation increases as commuters age, with the largest
gap observed for those older than the age of 65, when women used
active modes of transportation 1.2% more than men in 2011 (Figure 4).
However, this value has decreased from previous survey years, indicating 
that the gender difference in active commuting has narrowed
somewhat over time. There is a more substantial gender gap in public
transit than in active transport. Women are approximately 5% to 10%
more likely than men to use public transit for work trips (Figure 2).
The gender gap in public transit also appears to have decreased over
time and increases with age (Figure 3).

Automobile Use

Between 1986 and 2011, the automobile mode share (drivers and passengers 
as percentage of total trips) in the greater Toronto and
Hamilton area increased for all age groups and both for females and
males (Figure 1). During this 25-year period, the automobile mode
share for females increased from 12.1% to 27.7% and from 14.0%
to 31.3% for 11- to 13- and 14- to 17-year-olds, respectively. Male
automobile use for these age groups increased from 11.6% to 25.1%
and from 12.7% to 25.1%. Driving has increased more for females
than for males; there is a wider gender gap for 2011 than for 1986
for students 11 to 17 years of age (Figure 3). The most recent data
indicate that female children and female youths of ages 11 to 17 years
are more likely to be driven or drive to school than males. However,
as youths transition to postsecondary school or full-time work (18 to
24 years), males are more likely to drive or be driven to school and
work. This effect is present in all survey years beginning in 1986,
where 46.1% of females and 61.1% of males used the automobile to
commute (Figure 1).
While the gender gap in automobile use increased from 1986 to
2011 for elementary and secondary students, it decreased for post-secondary 
and full-time work trips. In 2011, women of ages 18 to
24 years traveled by automobile 6.8% less than men, whereas they
drove 14.9% less than men in 1986 (Figure 3). Women also continue
to have lower auto use for their commute throughout adulthood than
do men. Since 1986, women in the remaining age groups (= 25 years)
have been less likely to drive or be driven to work than men. While
a gender gap in automobile use persists into 2011 and increases with
commuter age, the region’s gender gap is less prominent than it was
25 years ago (Figure 3).

Gender and Household Characteristics

Since 1986, women have been less likely to drive to work than men,
a finding that remains when accounting for the household characteristics 
selected in this study. In 1986, in households where only one
vehicle was present, men had a driving mode share that was 33.6%
greater than women (Table 1). This effect is present in 2011, but has
reduced to a difference of 22.5% (Table 1). The gender gap in driving
to work decreases as the number of cars per household increases, but
driving to work remains higher for men than for women, regardless
of the number of vehicles.
With an increase in household size, the gender gap in driving
to work increases as well. In the 1986 survey, men drove to work
37.8% more than women in households with six or more members,
but drove only 24.9% and 26.3% more often in households with
one to two and three to five members, respectively (Table 1). The
2011 survey results report similar findings of increased gender differences 
with household size increases, but the difference between
female and male driving is found to be lower than in 1986.
The distance between home and work may affect the gender gap
in commuting. The smallest difference between female and male
auto trip distance is observed at 0–2 km, with a difference of 20.5%
in 1986 and 7.7% in 2011 (Table 1). In 1986, the greatest difference
was observed at distances of 7 to 10 km and 11 to 19 km; however,
on the basis of the 2011 survey, the gender gap appears to increase
with trip length.
For work trips, the gender gap in driving appears largest for city
of Toronto households. In 1986, the male automobile driver mode
share was 31.2% higher than that for females and 21.6% higher in
2011 (Table 1). The work trip gender gap also appears largest for
commuters traveling to workplaces located in the city of Toronto in
both 1986 and 2011. In some of the other parts of the study area, and
in the city of Hamilton, the gender gap in work travel appears to have
narrowed somewhat by 2011. For example, for both household and
workplace location, Hamilton had a gender gap of approximately
21% in 1986 but only approximately 9% by 2011 (Table 1). Overall,
the male driving mode share has remained relatively consistent, with
increased driving by females appearing to narrow the gender gap
over time.

Gender and Distance

The distance between work and home differs between full-time
employed men and women. In 1986 and 2011, females took more
short trips than males (Figure 5). For both men and women, straight-line 
trip distances have increased since 1986, with more commuters
making longer trips today than 25 years ago. The difference in trip
length between women and men decreased between 1986 and 2011;
however, women still appear to work closer to their homes than do
men. The median straight-line trip distance to the nearest kilometer
was 7 km for women and 10 km for men in 1986. In 2011, those
distances increased to 10 km for women and 12 km for men.

Gender and Licensing

Twenty-five years ago, women of all ages had lower driver licensing
rates than men. In 1986, between 38.3% and 47.4% of licensed drivers
were women, and between 52.6% and 61.7% were men (Figure 6).
A general upward trend in licensing for women is observed since this
date for age cohorts older than age 25; however, a downward trend
in female drivers is observed after 2001 for 16- to 24-year-olds. In
2006 and 2011, women between the ages of 16 and 24 had lower
licensing rates than in previous years, suggesting that females may
be acquiring licenses later in life than men.

Discussion of findings

Gender and Age

Trips made between home and school shape a child’s travel experiences 
and may influence their future mobility patterns. A greater
focus on active and sustainable transportation options for children
and youths could potentially produce a transport future with less traffic 
congestion and autodependence than what is typical in today’s
North American cities and regions. AST to elementary and secondary 
school has declined over time and has decreased more for

girls than boys, producing a greater AST gender gap in 2011 than
was present in 1986. The lower level of AST for females may be
attributed to parental perceptions of risk surrounding abductions by
strangers and the idea that a child is protected when driven to school
(26). Qualitative research on school travel in the city of Toronto
suggests that fear of abductions, strangers, and traffic safety may be
primary reasons for driving children to school (26). The sensationalism 
of stranger abductions in the media also likely produces and
reinforces parental fears regarding independent travel by females
and may result in less participation in active travel among girls.
Parents may believe they are reducing safety risks by driving their
children (especially their daughters) to school (i.e., risk of abduction 
and injury from pedestrian collisions); however, automobile-occupant 
injury presents a much greater risk. The occupant fatality
rate (ages 0 to 19) in Canada in 2005 was seven times greater than
the pedestrian fatality rate (27). Driving children to school, particularly 
females, has increased in recent decades and contributes to an
overall increase in automobile dependence.
As adolescents age and transition into postsecondary school or full-time 
work, automobile use increases, with the male automobile mode
share surpassing that of females for 18- to 24-year-olds). One factor
influencing a greater proportion of male drivers than female drivers
is the age at which individuals obtain their driver’s license. In the
greater Toronto and Hamilton area, females may be acquiring their
driver’s licenses later than males or may be deciding not to become
licensed at all. In 1994, the province of Ontario introduced a graduated 
licensing system that requires two license levels before obtaining
full license privileges. The licensing procedure requires completion
of a written test and two road tests, a process lasting, at a minimum,
20 months. While this system may prolong license procurement for
all young adults, it appears to have had a greater impact on females.
Data from 2011 suggest that females acquire their licenses later in life
and drive less to work than males.
The gender gap in active transportation, public transit, and auto
use for full-time workers increases as individuals age, which may
be related to a number of factors, including household responsibilities, 
distance to work, and access to a personal vehicle. The lower
levels of auto­mobile use for women along with higher levels of
use of alternative modes (e.g., walking, public transit) is a finding
consistent with literature (28, 29). Increased female labor-force participation 
during and following World War II and the rise of the two-worker 
(paid employment outside the home) household produced
new decisions and new ways of negotiating mobility and transport
in households. This study suggests that the gender gap in work trip
travel mode has decreased over time.

Gender and Household Characteristics

Findings suggest that gender differences in school and work mode
share change with factors including distance, location, and vehicle
or license ownership. Research regarding the journey-to-work has
pointed to a number of reasons for lower automobile use for women
than for men, typically related to the gendered quality of good parenting, 
motherhood, income, and labor market participation. One limitation 
of the TTS is that it does not collect household or individual
income data, which restricts arguments that can be made surrounding
type of employment, income status, and travel patterns. A measure
that may provide partial information about affluence is vehicle owner-ship; 
higher income households are shown to have higher levels of
car ownership (30).

Although men are more likely to drive to work regardless of the
number of vehicles per household, the difference between female
and male driving is substantially greater in households with lower
automobile ownership. However, these results support other studies
that found lower car use for women than for men in households where
there were fewer automobiles than drivers (29). With only one vehicle 
present, 65.6% of full-time working men and 43% of full-time
working women drove to work in 2011. Other research in the city of
Toronto suggests that distance and income influence car allocation
and that men and women living in higher income areas with long trip
distances tend to have higher car ownership (30).
Household size can also provide information about household
gender dynamics and transportation. In households with six or more
members, women are less likely to drive to work than in smaller
households. This is likely because of the larger amount of unpaid
labor that women engage in and tasks associated with running a large
household. To accomplish these tasks, women may work closer to
home as a shorter distance between home and work enables ongoing
maintenance of household responsibilities. The Household Responsibility 
Hypothesis (HRH) suggests that women have greater household 
responsibilities than men, causing them to choose shorter
commutes to work (21). The 2011 TTS data suggest that the gender
difference in driving based on household size has decreased, which
could suggest that either (a) the HRH may be less prevalent today
than in the past, or (b) that women are simply scheduling unpaid
work into other times of the day and simply working longer hours
inside and outside the home. As mentioned previously, the gender
gap has decreased due to the increasing use of the automobile for
women. Higher automobile use by females has likely occurred
because many regions of the greater Toronto and Hamilton area
have become increasingly suburban and car-oriented. Women with
paid work outside the home could in many cases quite justifiably
perceive that public transit will not provide the required level of
service necessary to support the perfect storm of having paid work
outside the home, while continuing to engage in the lion’s share
of household maintenance and child-related tasks (i.e., particularly
transport and communication) (31).
The introduction of graduated licensing in Ontario may be associated 
with the lower number of women acquiring a driver’s licenses
at a young age. The later age at which women obtain their driver’s
license may also be a product of their travel experiences during
childhood. Girls are chauffeured to school more often than boys
and may participate in independent travel later than males, which
minimizes the need for a driver’s license at a young age. Women
may obtain their license later in life than men, but the proportion of
female drivers today is greater than that in 1986 (Figure 3). This supports 
research in the United States that found an increase in female
drivers as a percentage of total drivers from 1963 to 2010 (32). This
increase in licenses for women in recent decades may translate into
increased driving to work and represents a higher level of observed
mobility potential for women than was observed in the past.

Conclusion

This study demonstrates a narrowing of the gender gap over time and
a widening of the gender gap as individuals age. To alleviate issues
of traffic congestion in the greater Toronto and Hamilton area, it is
important to determine what is driving the narrowing of the gap over
time. Further research is required to unpack why this effect is present 
within specific parts of the lifecycle and how societal changes in

parenthood and labor force participation may have influenced such
changes. The Big Move, the regional transportation plan for greater
Toronto and Hamilton area, overlooks the complexities of gender
in the conversation about transportation and travel demand. This
major document, guiding transportation planning practices in greater
Toronto and Hamilton area until 2031, makes no mention of gender as
it relates to travel demand. A better understanding of why, where, and

how this gender gap changes is required to determine ways in which the
increased use of automobile use for everyone can be addressed. Transportation 
policy makers who wish to develop policy to increase the
use of active and sustainable modes should give more attention to the
gendered qualities of transportation systems and travel demand.
