Built environment and children's travel to school

The decline in children's active travel has signi<U+FB01>cant implications for urban planning and sustainable
mobility. This research explores the in<U+FB02>uence of built environment on children's travel to school across a
range of typical urban environments in Australia. The analysis draws on a sample of children and their
parents from nine primary schools across four urban regions: Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth and Rock-hampton. 
The built environment features for each school neighbourhood are measured. An analysis of
travel, socio-demographics and attitudes to travel is conducted. The <U+FB01>ndings indicate that children residing 
in built environments that are more dense and urban are signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with more active
travel to school and for other journey purposes. Distance to school is critical for active travel (AT) and
many children lived beyond walking distance. While built environment is important, a decisive role for
children's active travel to school and other places is seen in the combination of preferences and licences.
Children who AT prefer to be more autonomous/independent travellers and have parents who foster
their IM; conversely, children's preferences for being driven coincides with parents' fears for IM and lack
of con<U+FB01>dence in their children abilities to travel independently.

1. Introduction                                                                             
											
Consistent with other countries in the developed world there                               
has been a decline in the number of Australian children travelling                          
by active modes (walking and cycling) to school and an increase in                          
the numbers being driven to school (Van der Ploeg et al., 2008).                            
This decline in active travel (AT) has been accompanied by a decline 
in the independent mobility (IM) of children. Along with a                            
wide range of concerns, including health, social connectedness,                             
and wellbeing, the reduction of AT has signi<U+FB01>cant implications for                          
sustainable mobility and urban planning policy.                                             
There is now a wealth of empirical research emanating from                             
North America associating the physical design and form of built                             											
environments with the travel behaviour outcomes of adults (see									
for example Rodriguez and Joo, 2004; Ewing and Cervero, 2002;
children's travel (Sallis and Glanz, 2006, Panter et al., 2008).
Crane, 2000). The PLACE study (Cerin et al., 2007; University of												
Queensland Cancer Prevention Research Centre, 2005) and the											
RESIDE study (Giles-Corti et al., 2008) add Australian evidence to											
this research. Tempering the notion that built environment alone											
affects travel behaviour are a wealth of studies that demonstrate                           
the contribution of socio-economic factors and attitudes to travel                          
												
outcomes (Schwanen and Mokhtarian, 2005; Mokhtarian and Cao,
2008; De Vos et al., 2014).
The extent to which the design and form of built environments
in<U+FB02>uences children's travel, as opposed to adult's travel, is under-researched 
(Van Goeverden and De Boer, 2013). That children's
mobility is in<U+FB02>uenced by adults is not in question. Parental fears of
‘stranger danger’ and traf<U+FB01>c safety are strong determinants of
parent's restrictions of children's travel (Mackett, 2013). It is not
enough, however, to simply assume children's attitudes and behaviours 
will mirror those for adults. Where children do get to
travel independently their travel choices may not simply be determined 
by time or cost, the design of the built environment may
have an in<U+FB02>uence. Of the limited evidence available, relationships
have been observed between the absence of footpaths, presence of
busy streets, long distances to schools and other destinations and
Since the early 1990s there has been a key shift in town planning 
practise throughout the developed world. The rise of Smart
Growth or New Urbanist policies (Congress for New Urbanism,
2001; Morris and Kaufman, 1998; Katz, 1994) together with sustainable 
mobility initiatives, across North America, the UK, Europe
and Australasia, calls for a shift to higher densities, mixed land
uses and replacing mobility with proximity to enhance accessibility 
by walking, cycling and public transport. Still, empirical
evidence supporting ways in which this objective is achieved for                                                          				   
                              								
various population groups is modest. In Australia, at least, there is
a lack of evidence as to the role of varying physical built environments 
on children's travel. The purpose of this paper is to
examine this question by looking at the range of factors that shape
children's journey to school across four broad urban regions in
Australia – inner urban, middle suburb, outer urban, and a regional
country town.

2. Background: children's active travel, independent mobility
and the built environment

For children, walking and cycling to and from school is important 
for a number of reasons. The routine nature of the journey
to and from school provides potential bene<U+FB01>ts to children's health
and wellbeing, contributing to the volume of children's everyday
physical activity (Mackett and Paskins, 2008; Faulkner et al., 2009),
affording them skills for independent travel (Tranter and Pawson,
2001), and providing opportunities for them to interact and engage 
with their natural and built local environments (Fusco et al.,
2012). Despite the increasing recognition of bene<U+FB01>ts, however,
studies are reporting a decline in the rates that children are participating 
in AT to school in many developed countries (see Fyhri
et al., 2011 for Denmark, Finland, Great Britain and Norway;
Buliung et al., 2009 for Canada; Peddie and Somerville, 2006 for
Australia; Boarnet et al., 2005 for United States). Looking speci<U+FB01>cally 
at cycling, the reported decline in rates of travel to school is
dramatic despite reported high bicycle ownership rates (Christie
et al., 2011).
An important factor in determining children's AT is the licence
to travel which parents provide children. Hillman et al. (1990)
de<U+FB01>ned four licences children acquire in gaining their own independent 
mobility (IM): the licence to walk from school; cross
roads; ride a bicycle; and catch public transport. The restrictions
on children's licences are becoming stricter due to the increased
concerns regarding the risk to children's safety in the public realm
(Rudner, 2012). The licences to IM vary between children (O’Brien
et al., 2000). The age of 10–11 years appears to delineate the
transition between non-independent and independent mobility,
although there are variations by gender, travel mode and journey
purpose. Brown et al. (2008) reporting a UK study found a marked
increase in IM when children reached 11 years of age, yet these
licences were stricter for girls, particularly with regard to cycling.
Zwerts et al. (2010) reporting a Belgian study of 10–13 year olds
found that boys travelled more often than girls and a greater
proportion of boys were independent travellers or IM. This transition 
point is not static, studies in the UK have shown a decline in
the percentage of 10 and 11 year olds with IM from a reported 94%
in 1970, 54% in 1990 and 47% in 1998 (Hillman, 1970; Hillman
et al., 1990; O’Brien et al., 2000). Other studies (such as Fyhri and
Hjorthol, 2009, in Norway) do not specify ages where major
transitions occur; rather they note that age is an important in<U+FB02>uence 
on the level of independence.
The quality of the built environment around home and schools
plays an important role in in<U+FB02>uencing children's rates of travel to
school. Distance to school is one of the most consistently reported
factors associated with children's active travel rates to school, with
children more likely to walk or cycle to school the closer they live
to the school (for example, Schlossberg et al., 2006 in Oregon, U.S.;
Cole et al., 2007 in South East Queensland; McDonald, 2007 in a
national U.S. study; and Ziviani et al., 2006 in Brisbane, Australia).
Some researchers suggest that physical built environment elements 
in<U+FB02>uence children's IM, such as traf<U+FB01>c calming on streets;
safe paths and routes to school; secure end-of-trip facilities at
schools; and monitored road crossings (Mackett, 2013; Johansson,
2006; Carver et al., 2005). Other scholars assert that perceptions of

safety are more in<U+FB02>uential (Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009).
For policy makers, an evidence base is emerging regarding the
built environment factors that shape decision-making and behaviour 
related to active modes of travel within adults. The potential
built environment factors at play include functional aspects such
as: the distance between places; street design and geometry; the
connectivity of streets; path infrastructure, aesthetic qualities;
safety; the mix of land uses; and the proximity and quality of
destinations (Olaru and Curtis, 2015; Saelens and Handy, 2008;
Pikora et al., 2003; Bagley and Mokhtarian, 2002; Crane, 2000;
Kitamura et al., 1997; Cervero and Radisch, 1996). The relationship
is likely more nuanced – moderated by journey purpose-for example, 
in a study in Adelaide, Owen et al. (2007) found that street
connectivity was associated with walking for transport, but not for
recreation, indicating that built environment factors are associated
with different types of walking activities in different ways. A
children's perspective may add a further dimension given they
may not see even a utilitarian journey as just that; they may add a
creative dimension to their journey. The provision of good physical
infrastructure has been posited as a means of addressing such
factors as gender inequities in travel to school (McDonald, 2012).
In addition to built environment factors, other socio-economic
and attitudinal factors play a role in determining whether children
are permitted to AT. At the household scale, the scheduling of
activities and parent's travel to work (McMillan, 2005; McDonald,
2008; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008; Copperman and Bhat,
2010; Lang et al., 2011) is in<U+FB02>uential in shaping children's likelihood 
of walking or cycling to school. McDonald (2008) found in
the US that child's travel mode to school was signi<U+FB01>cantly associated 
with their mother's commute to work. In New Zealand, Lang
et al. (2011) asserted that parents may choose to drive their children 
to school, even when residing in close proximity to school,
due to the perceived convenience of car travel. Attitudes and
preferences of parents in Austin, Texas with regard to their children's 
travel activity were in<U+FB02>uential on whether their children
walked to school (Lee et al., 2013). Furthermore, parents who
walked their children to school had more positive perceptions of
the walkability of the built environment than those who drove
their children to school McMillan et al., 2007; Panter et al., 2010a,
2010b; Trapp et al., 2011). Research has found that there are important 
differences between the factors in<U+FB02>uencing adults’ and
children's travel (McMillan, 2007; Mitra, 2012). For example a
study from Belgium reported that parents' perceptions of land use
mix are more in<U+FB02>uential on active travel than children's perceptions 
(De Meester et al., 2014). Social norms, the cultural aspects of
walking (Mitra et al., 2010; Panter et al., 2010a, 2010b), and economic 
contexts (Valentine, 2004; Mitchell et al., 2007; McMillan
et al., 2006; Mitra et al., 2010), as well as the presence of social
support for active travel (Sallis et al., 2008) also play a major role
in shaping children's daily travel activity. However, as Kerr et al.'s
(2007) research from Atlanta, US, has shown, despite ethnic and
socio-economic differences between households and neighbourhoods, 
built environment factors remain signi<U+FB01>cantly associated
with children walking to school.
Policy responses to concerns about declining rates of children's
AT to school have seen the emergence of a range of initiatives.
Responses such as the introduction of walking school buses have
been popular and can have an in<U+FB02>uence on rates of active travel to
school, but they have been criticised due to their resource intensity 
and tendency to be present mainly in higher socio-economic 
areas (Collins and Kearns, 2005). Alternatively, policies
targeted towards building social trust and community connectedness, 
as well as the safety of neighbourhoods, could increase 
children's AT to school (Carver et al., 2013). Behavioural and
education programmes (community walking bus and road crossing 
agents, walking and cycling days, co-curricular physical

activities in the neighbourhood are likely to increase self-ef<U+FB01>cacy
of children as AT's) can be integrated into all schools, with programmes 
adapted to school needs. The impact of policy change
outside the transport domain can have adverse consequences for
children's AT to school. The movement towards ‘choice’ policy in
educational markets has provided greater freedom for parents to
select schools in which to enrol their children, instead of simply
attending the closest school. Greater choice can lead to an increased 
need to access schools outside feasible walking and cycling 
distances for children (Wilson et al., 2007). The rationalisation 
and merging of schools, in response to the relaxing of local
enrolment policies and changing demographics, can lead to erosion 
in social cohesion and community identity (Witten et al.,
2001). This can impact on parental attitudes where parents become 
less willing to allow their children IM.
It is clear from the above literature that both built environment
and socio-demographic and attitudinal factors in<U+FB02>uence children's
active travel. There is an increasing body of research in this respect
(the reader is directed to the comprehensive review provided by
Mitra, 2012), but very little is drawn from Australian cases. Not-withstanding 
this, two important questions remain for planners
and policy-makers developing policy for increasing children's
rates of active travel to school: (1) What aspects of the built environment 
are critical in facilitating children's active travel?
(2) Are there any other moderators of children's independent
mobility that policy making can in<U+FB02>uence/action upon?

3. Research design

3.1. Overview

This paper reports on an analysis of children, parents and built
environment elements based in nine school neighbourhoods from
varying urban environments. The purpose of this paper is to assess
to what extent built environment matters to children's AT to and
from school, compared to the attitudes of children and their parents 
towards active mobility.
A socio-ecological approach is used to address the two objectives 
(what policy approaches would be in<U+FB02>uential and what built
environment factors could increase children's AT to school) and
interpret <U+FB01>ndings. Conceptual frameworks have been developed
by Panter et al. (2008) and Mitra (2012). These frameworks situate
decision-making as nested within household, neighbourhood, institutional 
and broader socio-political domains (Fig. 1).
Drawing on McLaren and Hawe (2005), this research adopts a
multi-level approach to IM and children's school travel activity,
starting with the individual level characteristics to the social-political 
context. Age, gender and attitudes of children are important

factors in how children prefer to go to school. Household factors
include children's licence to travel (negotiation between parents
and children) and social norms and values. It is the interplay between 
these two levels and within the context of neighbourhood,
that also affects children's travel. For policy makers it is important
to understand these multi-scale in<U+FB02>uences and how they are in<U+FB02>uenced 
by policy actions directed towards children's mobility.

3.2. Sample

Children aged 9–13, and their parents, were recruited from
nine primary schools in three Australian cities – Brisbane (QLD),
Melbourne (VIC) and Perth (WA) – and one regional centre –
Rockhampton (QLD) (Fig. 2). This is the age range where children
begin to transition to IM (see discussion above). Most schools are
located in the metropolitan area of one of the three State capitals;
three schools are located in the regional centre of Rockhampton.
Rockhampton is akin to a country town, with a current population
of 115,419 (ABS, 2012), functioning as an important service provider 
for economic activity in the broader region.
The schools were selected to represent a range of built environment 
types based on their location in the urban region: inner
urban, middle suburb, outer urban and regional areas. In order to
control for the impact of socio-demographic factors on travel, the
Australian government Index of Community Socio-Education Advantage 
(ICSEA) was used to select schools. This index groups
schools of similar socio-economic circumstance. Selection was
restricted to those falling in the in the middle range of the index
(with values between 900 and 1100) to avoid the extreme 10%
lowest and highest schools. While it was anticipated that the
majority of children attending the school would reside in the
neighbourhood, education policy varied. WA required students to
attend their closest school, VIC allowed more <U+FB02>exibility in the
enrolment catchment, QLD had a policy of unrestricted choice.
Questionnaires were completed by the children during class
and a separate questionnaire was provided for their parents to
complete. Ethics approvals were granted by each State Department
of Education and University. A condition of the approval was that
school names not be reported.

3.3. Analytic technique

Although not new to travel behaviour (Oppenheim, 1975; Neale
and Hutchinson, 1981), cluster analysis has increasingly been applied 
in transport in the last decade, primarily for “classifying”
locations (e.g., Kamruzzamann et al., 2014, proposed a typology of
neighbourhoods based on density and accessibility features) or for
contrasting behaviours and attitudes (Anable, 2005, identi<U+FB01>ed
travel segments using attitudes and Lin et al., 2009, distinguished

lifestyle categories based on socio-demographics and activity-travel 
data). Following the same line of enquiry, this research
creates typologies of children and parents to explore children's                            
travel to school and the perceived barriers in using AT and compares 
them with typologies of school neighbourhoods, based on                                   											
their built-environment characteristics.												
Cluster analysis is a multivariate technique applied to group											
objects based on their similarity within a set of user-selected											
characteristics. Here, the three separate cluster analyses (children,											
parents and the built environments around schools) were conducted 
in two steps: (1) <U+FB01>rst, a hierarchical clustering using Euclidean 
distances and the Ward method; and then (2) a quick-clustering 
using seeds from the <U+FB01>rst stage was re<U+FB01>ning the clusters' 
structure. In a successful analysis, clusters represent groups                        
that are homogeneous/similar in their set of characteristics and                            
quite different from the other clusters. Variables used in clustering                       
were derived from the literature and explained below. To account                            
for their different scales, standardisation was applied prior to                            												
calculating the dissimilarity measures. Different solutions (2–4											
clusters) were compared based on their measures of heterogeneity, 
their interpretability, and size of the clusters. The solutions 
presented in Section 4 were tested for their validity using                           
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) and cross-tabulations.                           
Variables not included in the cluster analysis, but for which it was                        
expected there would be variation across the clusters, were also                            
interrogated in this <U+FB01>nal stage of analysis.                                                
												
4. Empirical setting

4.1. Built environment characteristics of school neighbourhoods

Nine items, found in prior scholarly work as in<U+FB02>uential for AT
(Ewing and Cervero, 2002; Giles-Corti et al., 2011; McMillan, 2005;
McDonald, 2008; Panter et al., 2008; Mitra, 2012; Schlossberg
et al., 2006), were selected to assess the built environment features 
of each school neighbourhood (Table 1).
Each of the variables was based on commonly used built environment 
measures identi<U+FB01>ed in the literature and in some cases
applied by planning practitioners in designing or assessing new
development. The 400 m and 800 m ped-shed were calculated as
the developed area within 400 m or 800 m street network distance 
from the school – the higher the ratio, the larger the developed 
urban area within a 400 m or 800 m walkable distance to
the school. The 400 m and 800 m street connectivity ratio was
calculated by dividing the number of intersections of 3 or more
segments, by the total number of segments within the catchment
(determined by 400 m or 800 m Euclidean distance from school)-
the higher the ratio, the greater the street connectivity and so the
more permeable the area so likely to reduce potential walking or
cycling distances. Following Slater et al. (2010), density measures
were also applied as proxies for land-use mix. Population density
was measured by total number of persons divided by total ha
within an 800 m (Euclidean) distance from school (population
numbers were those reported in the Australian Bureau for Statistics 
2011 Census), while the residential density was measured by
total number of dwellings divided by total area in ha within an

800 m (Euclidean) distance from school. The choice of 400 and
800 m buffers around the schools was based on the literature
suggesting that 400 m represented a child's <U+FB01>ve minute walk
distance (Mitra et al., 2010) and 800 m represented a ten minute
walk distance (Panter et al., 2010a, 2010b). Distance to the CBD
provides an indicator for parent's journey-to-work (since Australian 
cities retain a dominant mono-centric form) in relation to
‘time budgets’ and the likelihood of using the car, which in turn
impacts on children's journey to school (for further discussion see
Burke et al., 2013).
As per sample design, the nine school neighbourhoods display
signi<U+FB01>cant variation in built environment features (Table 2). The
wide ranges con<U+FB01>rm distinct differences in the extent that the
neighbourhood would be conducive to AT: population density
(from 35.4 to 0.64 persons/ha), dwelling density (from 15.75 to
0.22 dwellings/ha), distance from the central business district
(CBD) (from 25 km to 2 km), 400 m ped-shed (from 76% in a 5-min
walk to school to 15%), 800 m ped-shed (from 63% in a 10-min
walk to school to 8%), two sites were severed by a railway and <U+FB01>ve
sites had a major road running through the neighbourhood.
These pro<U+FB01>les are further supported by the street and lot layouts 
and pedestrian catchment areas, presented in Fig. 3. Site 1
(Spring<U+FB01>eld) is in a master planned community on the urban
fringe, but part of a planned satellite city in the South East
(800 m catchment)
Queensland metropolitan region. The suburban layout follows the
New Urbanist principles with roads following a modi<U+FB01>ed grid
design where a hierarchical street system is in place. Site 2
(Greenslopes), located in middle suburban area has a high residential 
density, grid pattern streets and high connectivity. The
school is located on a main road. Site 3 (Rochedale) is a new
suburb, large parts of which are still under construction, located
on the urban fringe, 17 km from the CBD. It has primarily large
rural lots, with pockets of urbanised residential lots. The school
will service a predominantly urbanised area, but at present there
is very little developed land within the 800 m pedestrian catchment. 
Site 4 (East Brunswick) is an inner city suburb, characterised
by high residential density, mixed land use, reasonably well connected 
streets but with long blocks and alley connectors to improve 
permeability. Site 5 (Glenroy) is a middle suburb of medium
residential density. The street system follows a grid layout. There
are few main roads within the 800 m pedestrian catchment, but
part of the residential catchment is separated by a railway line. Site
6 (Melville) is an inner-urban suburb located 11 km from the Perth
CBD and 5.5 km from a large secondary city in the Perth metropolitan 
region. The street system follows a grid layout. The
neighbourhood is bordered by two regionally signi<U+FB01>cant highways,
one that links the City of Fremantle to the City of Perth, and the
other that serves as an important regional freight distributor between 
the airport and port. The three remaining sites (7. Mt Archer, 
8. Allenstown, and 9. Taranbanga) are part of large regional
centre. Sites 7 and 8 have a grid street system, site 9 a curvilinear
street system and residential densities are low.

4.2. Sample characteristics

A total of 1534 children from classes where the predominant
age was between 10 and 13 were invited to participate in the
study. From this 375 children were recruited with an average response 
rate of 24% (Table 3). During the course of the research,
eight of these children dropped out of the study and after data
validation the number of children further reduced to 273

Descriptive statistics of the sample are provided in Table 4. Out
of the 273 children, 70.7% are children between 10 and 11 years of
age, and 64.8% are girls. Depending on the geographical setting,
children have shorter or longer distances to school (distance
range¼ 3.4 km; std. dev. ¼1.44 km), and different modes to travel
to and from school. Two of the sites, located in Melbourne
(Glenroy and East Brunswick), have a much higher proportion of
Children who reported that they usually walked or cycled to school were

further in Section 4.3, this may be due to a combination of higher
proportion of boys (50%) with a higher population density
(24.77 persons/ha) and further distance from the major road
(1.6 km). Although the pedshed ratios are lower (0.41 and 0.40
respectively), the street connectivity ratios are lower too (0.53 and
0.57), which may be perceived as safer from the viewpoint of the
exposure to traf<U+FB01>c.

4.3. Cluster analysis <U+FB01>ndings

The presentation of the clustering solutions starts with the
analysis of the schools, followed by children's travel and circumstances 
and parent's attitudes.

4.3.1. Built environment clusters
The cluster analysis conducted for the nine built environments
(BE) included nine variables that describe the neighbourhood type
of each of the school sites (Table 1). They referred to: the connectivity 
of streets and the density of the urban area around the
school; key factors that are linked to the walkability of neighbourhoods 
(Giles-Corti et al., 2009); the presence of a major road
or railway within 800 m of the primary school (based on the hypothesis 
that major roads and railways create potential barriers to
children's active travel – Schlossberg et al., 2006); and density, as a
proxy for land-use mix (Slater et al., 2010).
Two clusters (pro<U+FB01>led in Table 5) emerged out of this analysis.
They are signi<U+FB01>cantly different from each other on only three out
of the nine characteristics, as indicated by the ANOVA tests
(Table 5). F Tests shows that population and dwelling densities
contribute the most to the description of clusters, followed by the
800 m ped-shed. This result does not suggest that street connectivity 
and severance by rail or road are unimportant for children's 
travel, but rather indicates that the variation across the nine
sites examined in this research was limited (e.g., the 400 m connectivity 
ratio varied only between 0.5 and 0.66). In addition, the
result should be interpreted with caution, as it may be an effect of
the low sample size. However, the nine schools appear to be located 
in areas with similar street connectivity or disruption by rail
and major roads (the larger the observed signi<U+FB01>cance level the less
the variable contributed to the classi<U+FB01>cation of clusters). Cluster
1 BE includes the three schools in the lower density areas of the
regional town Rockhampton and the Brisbane outer urban fringe
site (Mount Archer; Taranganba; Allenstown; and Rochedale),
whereas cluster 2 BE includes the metropolitan suburbs of inner

(Brunswick, Melville), middle (Glenroy, Greenslopes) and the outer
suburban New Urbanist (Spring<U+FB01>eld).
When comparing the children living in the two BE clusters by
age, gender, and the distance they have to travel to school, we
observe that children in cluster 1 are older (10.83 years on average
compared to 10.3 years on average for cluster 2), they include
fewer boys (28% compared to 42% in cluster 2) and children travel
further to school (4.72 km on average compared to 1.81 km on
average in cluster 2). We note that a 1.81 km would amount to
about a 25 min walk. These differences are statistically signi<U+FB01>cant
at 0.05 level.

4.3.2. Children clusters

The cluster analysis for children considered their active travel,
but also socio-demographic characteristics key in determining
their independent mobility:

   Preferred travel mode to school
   Active travel to school
   Active travel to locations other than school
   Year level
   Age
   Gender
   Distance to school

Children's self-reported usual travel to other locations (local shops,
parks, friends' houses, organised activities and places outside the
neighbourhood area) was also included as an indicator of the child's
overall AT. Children who usually travelled (more than half of the time)
to other locations by AT were considered active travellers. While
school catchment areas may be an outcome of planning or education
policy, the decision to include distance to school in children's clusters
(rather than BE clusters) was based on the important role that school
location plays in households’ relocation decisions (as also pointed out
by Mitra, 2012). Multiple studies have shown that children living
closer to school are more likely to walk or cycle to school as their
parents are less concerned with safety issues, more con<U+FB01>dent in their
children abilities to travel alone, and hence more supportive of active
travel (Schlossberg et al., 2006; Faulkner et al., 2009; Fyhri and
Hjorthol, 2009; Panter et al., 2010a, 2010b; Mitra, 2013; Ziviana et al.,
2004). Likewise, girls and younger children (Brown et al., 2008;
McDonald, 2008, 2012) are more likely to be accompanied (and most
often driven) to activities.
Two clusters (pro<U+FB01>led in Table 6) emerged out of this analysis.
They are signi<U+FB01>cantly different from each other as con<U+FB01>rmed by
the parametric and non-parametric tests (all tests statistically
signi<U+FB01>cant at 0.05 level). Children in cluster 1 are slightly younger,
less likely to be girls, and they are using more AT for all purposes.

Remarkably, clusters 1 and 2 separated children perfectly in terms
of their active travel to school.
As indicated, by far the most signi<U+FB01>cant variable that de<U+FB01>ned each
of the clusters was whether the child usually walked or cycled to
school, or whether they were driven. The almost perfect association
between the clusters and the mode of travel to school can be partly
explained by the average distance home to school. Children in cluster
1 (‘active traveller, AT) live at an average distance of 2.04 km from
school, whereas those in cluster 2 (‘not-active traveller, NAT) at an
almost double distance (3.84 km). This is consistent with <U+FB01>ndings in
UK (Mackett, 2013), where one of the reasons for the shift from
walking to car for the journey to school is due to the increasing distance 
(more than doubling from 1.8 km in 1985/1986 to 3.7 to 5.4 km
in 2009). Similarly, van Goerverden and de Boer (2013), highlighted
that modal choice is related to the “relative quality of the available
travel modes” (p. 76), which in turn depend on distance. In their study
comparing Flemish and Dutch students', primary school students
were more likely to the chauffeured to school if the distance was
greater than 3 km. Moreover, children in cluster 2 (NAT) show a signi<U+FB01>cantly 
higher preference for being driven, whereas children in
cluster 1 would like better to be IM (walk and cycle alone).

4.3.3. Parent clusters

The variables that made up the parent's cluster were organised

according to the licences parents grant on their children's travel
and their attitudes towards their children and other children's AT
and IM. Six questions from the parent survey were used to re<U+FB02>ect
children's licences to travel. These included four questions regarding 
the licences provided to children for IM – the licence to
travel TO school, FROM school, to cross roads, and cycle on main
roads unaccompanied by an adult – and two questions regarding
the range children can travel independent of adults – alone, and
with friends or siblings.
Three clusters emerged from the analysis of variables from the
parents' surveys. The pro<U+FB01>ling of parent clusters is separated into
two tables. Table 7 presents the variables related to the licences
that parents provide for their children to travel independently and
the range of independent travel children are permitted by their
parents, whereas Table 8 indicates the values and perceptions of
social norms the parents held with regard to children's independent 
mobility.
Cluster 1 (‘free range’3) includes parents who allow their children 
to travel to school, to cross roads, or to cycle without an adult.
They also permit their children to travel by themselves within the

neighbourhood and if accompanied by a sibling or friend to travel
outside the neighbourhood (including the city). Parents in cluster
2 (‘home zone’) allow their children to walk to school without an
adult (which is translated in the highest AT proportion – 37 out of
61), but they are more reluctant when it comes to crossing roads
and completely opposed to cycling. These parents are comfortable
letting their children wander within their neighbouring streets
only, even if accompanied friends or siblings. Although not signi<U+FB01>cant, 
these parents live closest to the schools of their children
(2.68 km). By contrast, Cluster 3 (‘bubble wrapped’) includes parents 
who do not provide any IM licence to their children. They are
the most restrictive group and require the presence of an adult,
sibling, or friend when any of their children travel. These parents
only allow their children to travel by themselves within the street
and accompanied within the neighbourhood. They are most likely
to drive their children to school (27 out of 35). This may also be
explained by the distance to school, which is further in this cluster,
compared to ‘Free range’ and ‘Home zone’ clusters (Fig. 4).
Table 8 presents interesting results. Although all clusters show
strong agreement of parents in regard to developing children's
skills for IM, cluster 3 parents are less con<U+FB01>dent in their child's
ability to travel without an adult. This cluster also feels that licences 
to travel may be seen as an act of irresponsibility and other
parents would be concerned to see children travelling by

themselves in the neighbourhood. This attitude may seem to be at
divergence to their own travel as children, as this cluster walked
and cycled the most in their school years. Cluster 1, of ‘free range’
parents, had different travel experiences in their childhood and
none of them thinks that it is irresponsible to allow their children
to travel without an adult within the neighbourhood. They primarily 
walked and cycled to school in their childhood and they
have con<U+FB01>dence in their children abilities to become independent
travellers. Similar attitudes are observed for the parents in cluster
2 ‘home zone’.

4.4. Measures of association

Further analysis was conducted to see whether there are signi<U+FB01>cant 
associations between the three series of clusters (built
environment, children and parents). The results suggest a statistically 
signi<U+FB01>cant association between the built environment
clusters and the clusters of children (p o0.001). Table 9 further
con<U+FB01>rms the role of built environment in shaping travel: three
quarters of cluster 1 (lower density, towards the fringes) includes
children in cluster 2 (NAT), who usually go to school by car. Cluster
1 of children (AT and living closer to school) is signi<U+FB01>cantly associated 
with Cluster 2 BE (metropolitan, denser, and more
walkable).


Clusters of children are also signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with clusters 
of parents (p o0.001). Children in cluster 1, ‘active travellers’,
tend to have parents from cluster 2 of parents ‘home zone’ (37 out
of 61), whereas children in cluster 2, ‘not-active travellers’, are
more likely to have parents in cluster 3 ‘bubble wrapped’
(Table 10). As a result, active travel children of ‘free range’ and
‘home range’ parents have 55% of their travel by active modes
whereas the ‘bubble wrapped’ only 26%. Similarly, in the NAT2
group of children, those with ‘free range’ and ‘home range’ parents
used 37% active transport, and only 14% in the ‘bubble wrapped’
sub-group.
There were no signi<U+FB01>cant associations between parents' clusters 
and the school (BE) clusters, suggesting that social norms and
values may be more in<U+FB02>uential determinants of attitudes to children's 
travel.

5. Discussion and conclusion

Independent mobility has been measured in a number of ways,
using ‘licences’ provided by parents and alternatively, travel
characteristics self-reported by children (Page et al., 2009). This
research responds to the call for deepening the understanding of
independent mobility and provides additional evidence on the
relationships between children's travel, urban characteristics and
parents' attitudes and ‘licences’ provided to their children. This
study has applied cluster analysis to group children according to
their most distinguishing travel characteristics and compared
them with the built environment and the parents' values and
travel-related norms imposed on their children. Our aim has been
to explore whether built environment has an in<U+FB02>uence on children's 
travel.
This is the <U+FB01>rst study, to our knowledge, that has used cluster
analysis to explore a range of factors linked to children's travel to
and from school. We have found that:

(1) Distance to school has a strong in<U+FB02>uence on IM and it is related
to: built environment (density), availability or quality of school

(not investigated here, but it may explain the distances above
20 km), and ‘licences’ (perceived fear of parents to leave their
kids to travel independently).

(2)   In addition to densities, the 800 m ped-shed ratio was the only
signi<U+FB01>cant BE indicator, albeit marginally; other indicators,
although important, were less relevant because the sample
was quite homogeneous.

(3)   Despite of its marginally signi<U+FB01>cant effect (the sample does not
have substantial differentiation) age of children matters; as
expected, older children are allowed to (have more licences) to

walk, cycle in their neighbourhood.
(4)   Gender again seems related to the licences and boys can travel
more freely than girls.
(5)   Parents' perceptions and attitudes towards BE and IM are associated 
with children's AT; children with fewer licences are
likely to be less active than children without barriers.

(6)   It appears that a combination of preferences and licences lies
behind children's active travel to school and other places;
children AT prefer to be more autonomous/independent travellers 
and have parents who foster their IM by limiting the


number of licences; conversely, children's preferences for
being driven coincides with parents' fears for IM and lack of
con<U+FB01>dence in their children abilities to travel independently.

Returning to the socio-ecological approach our <U+FB01>ndings indicate 
the need for policy action in several domains. At the socio-political 
level, parental attitudes of those in the ‘bubble-wrapped’
cluster are clearly in<U+FB02>uenced by how they perceive others would
view their granting of licences for IM. At the neighbourhood level,
objective measures of the physical environment, especially 800 m
ped-shed ratio, densities, and distance to school are key discriminators 
between children who are active travellers versus
those who are not. At the household level we return to the need
for parents to change ‘licences’, re<U+FB02>ecting on their own early AT
and IM experiences which were less restrictive. At the level of the
individual child there may be latent support for children's active
and independent travel, highlighting the importance of education
and skills development programmes in schools. In all of this there
are important implications for health, well-being and liveability.
The distance children have to travel to school is critical and in
this case study extends beyond the standard <U+FB01>ve to ten minutes
understood to be comfortable walking time. The average distance
of households to school in school cluster 1 (metropolitan, walkable) 
is 1.69 km, whereas the walkable distance for children has
been de<U+FB01>ned as ranging from 800 m (Panter et al., 2010a, 2010b;
Zhu and Lee, 2008, 2009) and 1 km (Kerr et al., 2007). Re<U+FB02>ecting
<U+FB01>ndings in other research (Schlossberg et al., 2006; Cole et al.,
2007; McDonald, 2007) distance of households to school is the
most discernible factor associated with children's active travel
rates to school. Policies that locate schools in proximity to new
residential developments are already in place in Australia. Education 
policy, however, allows for more choice regarding school
enrolments and results in children living beyond distances
amenable for AT. This provision of greater choice in education
enrolment in Australia (perceived quality of education) has the
potential to further exacerbate children's active travel rates by
increasing the enrolment catchments for schools.
Travel behaviour change policies and infrastructure programmes 
such as Safe Routes to School (SRTS) may have some
potential to address declining rates of children's active travel. SRTS
is an international programme using education, advocacy and infrastructure 
improvements to address unsafe walking and cycling
environments and declining rates of children's active travel to
school (Stewart, 2011). While many children in our sample now
live beyond walking distance to school, they are located within a
comfortable cycling distance. Bicycle ownership is high (92% of the
sample owned a bicycle), yet less than 4% rode to school, and this
despite a desire to do so. In Australia, cycling pro<U+FB01>ciency training is
no longer offered and many urban environments have poor cycling
infrastructure and it is here that policy makers must direct
attention.
Aside from the journey to school, there may be an argument for
policy makers to increase the focus on travel to non-school destinations 
in the neighbourhood. The results indicate that in the AT
children's cluster there is a less de<U+FB01>nite membership-base of
children who walked or cycled to non-school locations which
supports this argument. Even regular active travellers to school
were not usually walking or cycling to other places in the neighbourhood. 
Such policy responses would require attention paid to
providing a more diverse range of activities within proximity to
children's households.
On a <U+FB01>nal note, the association between the AT children's
cluster and the inner metropolitan, dense and walkable school
cluster suggests that built environment factors are important for
policy makers to consider. In addition to densities, the 800 m pedshed 
ratio was the only signi<U+FB01>cant BE indicator, albeit marginally;
other indicators, although important, were less relevant because
the sample was quite homogeneous.

