Children's travel to school—the interaction of individual, neighbourhood and school factors

abstract
The increase in average distance from home to secondary school over recent decades has been accompanied by a signi<U+FB01>cant growth in the proportion of pupils travelling to school by motorized means as
opposed to walking or cycling. More recently this switch in travel mode has received considerable attention 
as declining levels of physical activity, growing car dependence and the childhood obesity “crisis”
have pushed concerns about the health of future generations up the public health agenda, particularly in
the U.S., but also in the UK and Europe. This has led to a proliferation of international studies researching
a variety of individual, school and spatial characteristics associated with children's active travel to school
which has been targeted by some governments as a potential silver bullet to reverse the trend. However,
to date national pupil census data, which comprises annual data on all English pupils, including a mode of
travel to school variable, has been under-utilised in the analysis of how pupils commute to school. Furthermore, methodologically, the grouped nature of the data with pupils clustered within both schools
and residential neighbourhoods has often been ignored - an omission which can have considerable
consequences for the statistical estimation of the model. The research presented here seeks to address
both of these points by analysing pupil census data on all 26,709 secondary pupils (aged 11–16) who
attended schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld, UK during the 2009–10 school year. Individual pupil data is grouped within
school, and neighbourhood, within a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model of active versus motorised modes
of commuting to school. The results support the <U+FB01>ndings of other research that distance to school is key,
but suggest that sociospatial clustering within neighbourhoods and schools is also critical. A further
<U+FB01>nding is that distance to school varies signi<U+FB01>cantly by ethnicity, with white British pupils travelling the
shortest distance of all ethnic groups. The implications of these <U+FB01>ndings for education and transport
policy are discussed.


1. Introduction                                                                         
											
In the mid-1980s the mean distance travelled to school by 11–                       
16 year olds in the UK was just over 2 miles; by 2013 this had                          
almost doubled, increasing to 3.7 miles (Department for Transport,                      
2013). This lengthening of the high school commute has been in<U+FB02>uenced 
by some of the urban-structural processes which have                            
occurred over the past 50 years. Firstly a marked increase in the                       
size of high schools, which began in the post-war decades (Rigby,                       
1979) has resulted in secondary schools drawing their pupil intakes 
from wider catchment areas on average. Second, the sub-urbanisation 
and decentralisation which has occurred in many                            
cities has dispersed some school-aged children to family housing                        
in low density new-build housing estates on the outskirts (Hoare,                       
											
1975), which involves both longer travel distances and an urban
form that favours car use (Dieleman et al., 2002, Newman and
Kenworthy, 2006). A third factor that has also in<U+FB02>uenced the
length of children's journey to school is legislation promoting
parental choice, which has encouraged the selection of out-of-area
schools (see for example Parsons et al., 2000, Hoare, 1975). In recent studies 
it has been estimated that less than half of all school-age 
children in England now attend their nearest school (Allen,
2007, Ferrari and Green, 2013).
These changes in the spatial con<U+FB01>guration of schools and urban
space have been accompanied by signi<U+FB01>cant social change such as
the rise of the dual-working family and growing private car
ownership, a corollary of increased household af<U+FB02>uence. These
have occurred over a period that has seen the cost of car travel
decrease in real terms compared to other forms of transport
(especially following deregulation and privatisation of public
transport which occurred in the 1980s (Fairhurst and Edwards,
											
					
1996)). The rise in volume of road traf<U+FB01>c associated with increased
private car use has also led to rising concerns about road safety,
which has in turn contributed to decreasing child independence
and increased parental surveillance. Parental strategies to cope
with this dual challenge often most conveniently involve driving
children to school en route to work.
All of these factors have combined to produce a highly complex
pattern of travel from home to school characterised by, and enabled 
by, growth in the use of motorised forms of transport. According 
to 1975/6 National Transport Survey data for Great Britain,
55% of all secondary school pupils walked to school, and 7% travelled 
by car (Rigby, 1979). By 2012 only 38% of pupils aged 11–16
years walked to school and 26% travelled by car (Department for
Transport, 2013). In 1975–6, walking was the selected mode of
travel for 93.6% of all “education” trips under 1.6 km (approximately 1 mile), 
exemplifying the key underlying constraint on
modal choice: distance.
Notwithstanding the effect of distance, the choices that children 
(and their parents) make with regards to school commuting
may depend crucially on the interaction of several factors operating 
at a number of levels. Neighbourhood-level factors, which
include characteristics of the urban form and structure, may have a
range of direct and indirect effects on travel behaviour. School-level 
factors, most notably variations in the ‘performance’ of
schools and the socioeconomic composition of their pupil intake,
may in<U+FB02>uence school and residential location choices, thereby
potentially circumscribing travel options and average travel distances 
to school. Individual-level characteristics, such as age, have
a relationship to the extent to which children will countenance or
be empowered to choose active forms of travel. The relationship
between factors at these different levels is likely to be very complex: 
individual pupils are simultaneously ‘members’ of their
neighbourhood and the school they attend, and models of travel
behaviour may be underpinned by both <U+FB01>xed (e.g., age, gender)
and random effects (e.g., distance to school).
The aim of this paper is to speci<U+FB01>cally consider the interaction
of these effects in explaining the travel mode of choice for secondary 
school children in Shef<U+FB01>eld, UK. A typical UK city characterised 
by a high degree of self-containment, signi<U+FB01>cant social
variation between schools and neighbourhoods, and a highly
heterogeneous set of pupils within the context of a ‘loosened’,
non-hierarchical spatial relationship between home and school
locations. The <U+FB01>ndings are important for policy makers aiming to
maximise the use of active forms of transport (e.g. for public
health reasons) or to minimise car use (e.g. for environmental or
congestion reasons) and suggest that policy ef<U+FB01>cacy is likely to be
highly contingent on contextual factors, not only of individuals but
of the schools they attend and the neighbourhoods they live in.

1.1. Structure of the paper

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 highlights some of
the shortcomings of the literature in this area to date. Data and
Methods, are described in Section 3, and the Results of the multilevel 
models are presented and discussed in Section 4. The
concluding remarks and policy implications are outlined in Section
5.

2. Active commuting: de<U+FB01>nition and correlates

The majority of the literature on commuting to school focuses
on walking and cycling, which are generally referred to as “active”
modes of transport. This term is often used in an oppositional,
dichotomous sense which either explicitly states (see for example
Lee et al., 2008), or implies that modes of transport such as
/ Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18
travelling by car, bus, or train are totally “passive” or “non-active”
(see for example Sirard and Slater, 2008, Voss and Sandercock,
2010). However, this is not necessarily the case, particularly with
regards to public transport where users walk to and from bus or
tram stops or train stations (Rissel et al., 2012). Yet, whilst it is
acknowledged that the degree of activity involved in different
modes of transport can be conceptualised as a continuum, which
itself has signi<U+FB01>cant policy implications, data considerations in the
present study mean that we generally classify journeys into those
that are predominantly “active” or “motorised”.
There is now a burgeoning international literature on active
commuting to school, particularly from the US, in the wake of a
childhood obesity ‘epidemic’, which has shone a spotlight on
school commuting as a potential ameliorative agent that could
provide children with a regular daily dose of physical exercise
(Banerjee et al., 2014). Although there are considerable differences
between the case of the US and Europe in terms of local geography, 
school-siting, the level of car dependency and the proportions 
of children walking and cycling to school, the dramatic
decrease in active commuting witnessed across North America in
recent decades is one possible future scenario in the UK.
A wide range of factors have been found to be associated with
active school commuting. Stewart’s (2011) review of 42 studies
found 480 correlates including: distance to school, family income
(access to private transport), concern about traf<U+FB01>c and crime en
route, parental views on walking, cycle use and family timetables.
Urban form has both a direct effect on mode of travel choice and,
by in<U+FB02>uencing parental opinion, an indirect effect. The urban form
factors Stewart (2011) identi<U+FB01>ed from other studies include:

 Active transport infrastructure-pavements, safe crossings, cycle
paths;
 Barriers such as major road or railway crossings encountered en
route;
 Network connectivity-local streets, route choice, cul-de-sacs;
 Land use mix-residential (populated) versus industrial, parks,
derelict land;
 Residential density – increased numbers of people, “eyes on the
street”;
 “Walkability”-aesthetic environment (greenery, trees, etc).

The evidence of the impact of urban form is broadly mixed and
is likely to be highly context speci<U+FB01>c. Kemperman and Timmermans 
(2014) found that Dutch primary school children were more
likely to walk (though not necessarily cycle) in more urbanised
neighbourhoods, although the relationship between factors is
complex and the impact of environmental characteristics may be
indirect (in that distance, for example, is a function of density).
Schlossberg et al. (2006) found that the density of road junctions
and cul-de-sacs in a neighbourhood, as proxies of ‘walkability’,
were signi<U+FB01>cant predictors of walking rates among middle school
pupils in Oregon. Urban form explanations can only be partial,
however. Stead (2001) found that individual and household-level
socioeconomic factors were more important than urban form in
explaining travel patterns, although no attempt was made to
predict travel mode.
The literature is further complicated by the impact of age on
the results. It is widely understood that age is a signi<U+FB01>cant correlate 
of active commuting (see for example Aarts et al., 2013,
Johansson et al., 2012). However, previous studies comprise a wide
range of subject age-groups, which preclude systematic comparison. 
There has tended to be a focus on younger children, who
often have less independence (Mammen et al., 2012) and who live
closer to school on average. English primary school children aged
5-10 live 1.6 miles from school on average, compared to 3.7 miles
for 11–16 year olds (Department for Transport, 2013). In order to

minimise the potential effect of parental supervision and variations 
in the extent children may be allowed autonomy, this study
focuses on high school children aged 11–16.
Much of the literature focuses either on individual-level predictors 
of commuting behaviour or on the effect of physical
neighbourhood characteristics (urban form). Given that both
strands of research appear to claim at least partial success in explaining 
mode suggests that there are important interaction or
multilevel effects that arise from pupils’ multiple membership of
non-hierarchical groups (e.g. households, schools and neighbourhoods 
simultaneously). Although multilevel methods have been
employed to investigate children’s mode of travel to school in the
Netherlands (Aarts et al., 2013; Bere et al., 2008), Australia (Trapp
et al., 2012) and Belgium (D’haese et al., 2011), to the best of the
authors’ knowledge this is the <U+FB01>rst piece of research to use this
technique in the UK. This is important because there is a need for
country-speci<U+FB01>c studies given substantial differences in education
policy, urban policy, and levels and forms of urbanisation (Kemperman 
and Timmermans, 2014, Sirard and Slater, 2008).
Aarts et al. (2013) found that low SES neighbourhoods were
negatively correlated with active commuting but that high social
cohesion and perceived social safety (among other factors) were
positively associated with walking and cycling. D’haese et al.,
(2011) used multilevel modelling to allow for clustering within
schools, but (probably due to small sample size) no school-level
factors were entered into the model. Despite the inclusion of
neighbourhood environmental factors such as aesthetic quality in
the model, no clustering by neighbourhood was undertaken. Trapp
et al. (2012) also adjusted for clustering within schools but not for
pupils living in different residential neighbourhoods (which vary
‘substantially’ by socioeconomic status p.173). The issue of cross-classi<U+FB01>cation 
where pupils from different neighbourhoods attend
the same school is not addressed. Although neighbourhood
walkability factors such as street connectivity and traf<U+FB01>c volume
are in the model, they are attached to the school rather than area
of residence. Bere et al. (2008) also took clustering between
schools but not neighbourhoods into account, despite <U+FB01>nding

signi<U+FB01>cant differences in school commuting patterns by ethnicity.
Therefore although the above studies have used components of
multilevel models they have not taken into account patterns of
autocorrelation through sociospatial segregation of residential
areas into account.

3. Data and methods

The research design conceptualises pupils as having (multiple)
membership of both schools and neighbourhoods thus they are
grouped within both. The relationship between schools and
neighbourhoods however, is complex, with pupils from one
neighbourhood attending many schools, and pupils within a single
school potentially hailing from many different neighbourhoods.
Pupils also possess personal socioeconomic characteristics (age,
gender, and ethnicity). A cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model is constructed 
to estimate the factors that best explain the variance in
pupils’ ‘active’ and ‘motorised’ commuting to school using a binary
logistic function.
Analysis was performed on all pupils aged 11–16 attending a
state-funded secondary school (including academies) in 2009-10
in Shef<U+FB01>eld, England, a relatively self-contained city dominated by
state school provision1. In our dataset, the neighbourhood-level

proportion of pupils who attend their nearest school2 was on
average 48.8% (median ¼ 48.3%), but varied considerably
(min¼0.0%, max¼ 95.2%, s ¼27.3%). It is clear that children attending 
schools that are not their nearest is very widespread, validating 
the selection of a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed model in which pupils
are members simultaneously of schools and neighbourhoods.
A linked database comprising tables on pupil, schools and
neighbourhoods was created. Anonymised data on pupils was
supplied by Shef<U+FB01>eld City Council within a strict data-sharing
agreement. Pupil variables included: school attended at the time
of the relevant pupil census3, age, gender, ethnicity, eligibility for
free school meals (FSM), a special educational need (SEN) <U+FB02>ag for
SEN-statemented or “School Action Plus” (as these two categories
may affect the choice of school), together with the geographical
coordinates of pupils’ residential location and attended school.
Importantly, the data included a variable recorded at a single time-point 
on pupils’ mode of travel to school. This variable was mandated 
in pupil census data by the Department for Education from
2008–9 to 2010–11. The principle advantage of the variable is its
sub-population coverage which comprises the vast majority of
pupils. Its disadvantages lie in having been recorded at a single
point in time with little by way of contextual information. Most
signi<U+FB01>cantly, the variable does not represent the variability of
home-school travel by direction of travel, potential variation
through the week, or seasonal change. Although one US study of
pupils aged 9–15 found that, for those children who lived less than
a mile from school, the majority of pupils who commuted to
school by active means one day a week did so for all <U+FB01>ve days
(Martin et al., 2007), this cannot be veri<U+FB01>ed in the present case.
The data were reality-checked by local authority of<U+FB01>cers who expressed 
concern that cycling is probably under-represented because 
the survey is undertaken in winter when daylight is minimal
and weather conditions can be severe. Consequently, we do not
disaggregate walking and cycling in our results. It should also be
noted that data collected in a classroom situation may be affected
by peer-group dynamics or 'social desirability’ bias (Millward et al.,
2013). Several research designs, such as those incorporating the
use of GPS tracking or travel diaries (DfT, 2013) can overcome
these limitations, but at the cost of sacri<U+FB01>cing the scale of data
collection. The use of survey data, such as the British Household
Panel Study/Understanding Society allows more socioeconomic
context but the sample size would not be large enough to analyse
local neighbourhoods and the role of school-speci<U+FB01>c or urban form
factors. Consequently, it was concluded that despite several signi<U+FB01>cant 
shortcomings the value offered by capturing usual mode
of travel at the individual level offered signi<U+FB01>cant analytical
advantages.
The pupil table comprised 26,709 pupils linked to 100 different
‘neighbourhoods’ and attending one of 27 different state secondary 
schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld. Following the exclusion of missing and
unclassi<U+FB01>able data, 25,798 cases remained (representing a loss of
3.4% of the data). Even taking into account this data loss, the high
level of study population coverage avoids problems such as sample
bias endemic in many national sample surveys (see for example
Mcdonald, 2008). Furthermore the size of the study population
and inclusion of all pupils resident within an entire local authority
district enabled a multilevel analysis of all neighbourhoods and in
this case, secondary schools across the city.
Data on the 27 schools came from the city council and the
Department for Education’s EduBase2 web portal. Variables included: 
the proportion of pupils in the school eligible for free
school meals (the FSM rate); the proportion of pupils recorded as

having any special educational need (SEN rate); the proportion of
pupils from black and minority ethnic backgrounds (BME rate);
the proportion of pupils for whom English was an additional
language (EAL rate); mean school Key Stage 4 results (proportion
of eligible pupils achieving <U+FB01>ve GCSEs at grades A*-C, including
English and Maths); and the faith status of the school (Christian/
secular).

Neighbourhood characteristics were drawn from the 2011
Census and other small area data. In order to avoid small cell sizes
within the multilevel model (see below), census output areas
(OAs)4 were aggregated into 100 neighbourhoods previously delineated 
by Shef<U+FB01>eld City Council for policy analysis (Thomas et al.,
2009). A bespoke weighted house-price index was also created

using Land Registry’s data on property sales (sales were pooled for
the period 2007–2011 and seasonally adjusted to overcome small
cell counts).
For each pupil, their route to school for both active and motorised 
modes was modelled using ArcGIS Network Analyst 10.1.
Route distances from home to school were calculated using the
Ordnance Survey Integrated Transport Network (ITN) for Shef<U+FB01>eld,
including the new Urban Paths layer on the basis of shortest route.
These layers were downloaded from Digimap (Edina, 2014). Assumptions were made about overall walking speeds (2.5mph) and
driving speeds on different types of roads at peak commuting
times to determine the route. The calculation of walk-speci<U+FB01>c

distances (using urban paths as well as roads) is an important
innovation that overcomes signi<U+FB01>cant limitations of previous research 
by allowing model variables to more closely replicate actual
walking behaviour among pupils.
Several urban form variables which previous research had
identi<U+FB01>ed as being related to commuting mode of choice
(Schlossberg et al., 2006) were also created for Shef<U+FB01>eld local
authority district. These included: residential density (calculated
from Of<U+FB01>ce for National Statistics postcode directory data), building 
density (from Ordnance Survey MasterMap), cul-de-sac density, 
road junction density and network junction density (including
junctions with urban paths)-all of which were calculated from
Ordnance Survey Integrated Transport Network layers using
techniques described in (Reference Suppressed for Review).
Table 1 shows the frequency of the usual mode of travel variable 
for Shef<U+FB01>eld pupils aged 11–16. This variable was recoded into
a dichotomous variable representing “active” (walking or cycling)
versus “motorised” (bus, car, taxi, tram, train) modes of commuting 
to school for the purposes of analysis. Local advice from
council of<U+FB01>cers working with schools indicated that the method of
administration for this question had varied across schools and
time, resulting in inconsistencies in the quality of data recorded
over the 3 year period it was collected. It was suggested that the
optimal year for data quality and robustness was 2009–105.
Therefore this was the year selected for cross-sectional analysis.
Several groups of cases were removed from the analysis. 643
cases in the ‘other’ category, which might refer to active or motorised 
modes, were removed from the analysis. These cases primarily 
related to pupils from three schools, suggesting that there
were localised problems in the administration of this question. To
avoid potential bias these cases were excluded. A further 265 cases
in the ‘walk’ category were found to involve estimated distances
greater than 3 miles, and therefore potentially indicative of an
inaccurate home address. These cases were also removed from the
analysis. The three mile cut-off was used as it would take approximately 
one hour at a sustained walking pace in an urban

environment, and is also the point at which children of secondary
school age are allowed to claim a free bus pass from the local
authority. An hour’s walk has also been used as a reasonable cutoff 
point for walking to school by other researchers (Mcdonald,
2008).
Shef<U+FB01>eld has a number of ethnic communities, many of which
comprise small numbers of people who are very unevenly spatially
distributed. Therefore for the purposes of analysis within the
multilevel model it was necessary to aggregate the detailed ethnic
categories provided in the pupil census data into four very broad
categories: white British, white other (e.g. EU, Irish), non-white
and “not known” in order to avoid the problem of common support (see below).

3.1. Correlation among school-level variables

A signi<U+FB01>cant degree of inter-correlation was found among the
school-level variables, especially BME and EAL rates (0.97), FSM
and SEN rates (0.79), as well as the SEN and EAL rates (0.59) - all of
which were signi<U+FB01>cant at p ¼ 0.01. Conversely, the school performance 
results at Key Stage 4 (GCSE-level) were found to be inversely 
correlated with both SEN ( 0.74), FSM ( 0.79) and, to a
lesser degree with EAL rates ( 0.17). A variable was therefore
created to represent “cumulative” disadvantage at the school level
by summing the FSM, SEN, and EAL rates (as BME and EAL so
highly correlated). However this was not found to be signi<U+FB01>cant
and was dropped from the model at an early stage.
Faith schools were found to have lower rates of pupils eligible
for free school meals (FSM), a proxy for deprivation (t ¼4, d.f. ¼ 4,
p¼ 0.05). This may in part be due to the higher degree of control
some faith schools have over their pupil selection criteria (Allen,
2007).

3.2. Correlation among neighbourhood-level variables


Signi<U+FB01>cant correlations were also found across a range census
data at the "neighbourhood" level. In particular, the proportion of

S. Easton, E. Ferrari
people in an output area with no access to a car or van was found to
be highly correlated with other local indicators of socioeconomic
disadvantage such as: unemployment (0.91), the rate of people in
basic (low skilled) occupations (0.89), household occupancy
(overcrowding) (0.80), and the proportion with no quali<U+FB01>cations
(0.73). Given these correlations and previous research <U+FB01>ndings
that lack of access to a car ‘… is the best single indicator of relative
deprivation’ (Voas and Williamson, 2001, p. 73), this indicator was
selected as a key variable measuring socioeconomic disadvantage
for entry into the model.

3.3. Urban form variables

The importance of urban form variables is underscored by the
distinctive geography of Shef<U+FB01>eld. Although England’s fourth largest 
city, it is relatively self-contained with an over-bounded administrative 
geography. The city comprises a diversity of urban
archetypes ranging from dense inner-city terraces to very spacious
suburban neighbourhoods and semi-rural villages. The city’s topography 
is hilly, which is likely to have an impact on travel mode
choice. For these reasons, it was considered important to include a
range of urban form variables in the model. The degree of correlation 
found among the urban form variables (residential density,
population density and building density) was also found to be
signi<U+FB01>cant. Cul-de-sac density, and network junction density were
also correlated. Small but signi<U+FB01>cant correlations were also found
between distance to school and the majority of the urban form
variables, which were tested through the addition of interaction
terms in the model.


3.4. A multilevel model of travel mode

A multilevel model was constructed in which the dependent
variable was mode of commuting to school, dichotomised into
active versus motorised means of transport. A multilevel model
was appropriate because of the grouped nature of the data
(Duncan et al., 1996). The data violates the underlying principle of
standard ordinary least-squares regression models of independent, 
uncorrelated observations. In this case pupils are socially 
and spatially grouped within both neighbourhoods and
schools. If grouping is ignored, this can result in an underestimation 
of the standard errors of regression coef<U+FB01>cients, which
means that statistical signi<U+FB01>cance could be over-estimated (Centre
for Multilevel Modelling, 2007). In the cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel
model employed here pupils from the same neighbourhood can
attend different schools, while pupils in the same school can come
from many different neighbourhoods (Fig. 1).

3.5. Model estimation and model <U+FB01>t

Models were estimated using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) Bayesian technique (Leckie and Bell, 2013), with initial
estimates calculated using iterative generalised least squares
(IGLS) as starting points for the MCMC estimation. The Deviance
Information Criterion (DIC) diagnostic was used to assess parameter 
signi<U+FB01>cance and the “goodness of <U+FB01>t” of the model (Browne,
2005). This diagnostic criterion balances overall model <U+FB01>t with
parsimony by penalising for model complexity (Reference Suppressed 
for Review). A general rule of thumb is that a reduction in
the DIC of more than 5 implies a variable is signi<U+FB01>cant to the
overall model (CMM, 2007). All models were estimated using
MLwiN (Centre for Multilevel Modelling, 2014). The signi<U+FB01>cance of
the regression coef<U+FB01>cients for <U+FB01>xed effects were compared and
formally tested using the Wald test in MLwiN, which produces a <U+03C7>2
statistic. Random parts of the model, however, such as the between-neighbourhood 
and between-school variances were tested
by observing the reduction in the DIC (Leckie and Bell, 2013). A
“null” model was estimated with individual pupils grouped within
the two higher level classi<U+FB01>cations-neighbourhoods and schools,
but with no explanatory variables (after Leckie and Bell (2013)).
Both of the higher-level variance components – (within school)
between-neighbourhood variance and (within neighbourhood) between-school 
variance—were found to be highly signi<U+FB01>cant (reducing 
the DIC by -5989 and -7831 respectively, thereby con<U+FB01>rming
the appropriateness of a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model.

3.6. Small cell sizes

One issue with complex multilevel analysis is that the number
of individuals (pupils in this case) is broken down into numerous
categories such as school, neighbourhood, age, gender, ethnic
group, SEN status and so on which quickly results in small cell
sizes. Consequently variables such as detailed ethnic categories
and very small areas were aggregated up into larger groups and
neighbourhoods in order to ensure there were enough pupils in
each category to undertake statistical estimation. However, the
small number of pupils in some categories still restricted further
exploration of certain variables—such as the interaction between
pupils with an SEN <U+FB02>ag and gender, detailed ethnic background
and gender.

4. Results and discussion

4.1. Some descriptive statistics

The network distances between home and school ranged from
less than 100 m to 21.7 km (13.5 miles), although the data are very
skewed (see Fig. 2 below). The mean distance for all pupils was
2.7 km but the median home-school distance was just over 2 km.
The median home-school distance for pupils who walked to school
was 1.33 km (mean 1.38 km) and for those who used motorised
modes the median was 3.1 km (mean 3.9 km). For pupils living less
than one mile from school, 82% walked, although this represents a
very substantial decline over the last three decades when compared 
to over 94% of high school pupils aged 11–17 in 1975/6
(Rigby, 1979). Despite this decline, walking rates in Shef<U+FB01>eld are
slightly higher than the national average, with just under 50% of
high school pupils recorded as walking to school (Table 1), compared 
to 38% across Great Britain (Department for Transport,
2010).
The results of the <U+FB01>nal model are presented in Table 2. The
most signi<U+FB01>cant explanatory components in the model are between-school variation, 
between-neighbourhood variation and

distance from home to school. The improvement in model <U+FB01>t
which resulted from the inclusion of these variables far outweighs
that of the other signi<U+FB01>cant variables. This <U+FB01>nding highlights the
high levels of autocorrelation that exist across residential space as
well as within educational institutions, and the consequent

importance of taking the sociospatial clustering of individual pupils
into account in any examination of school travel patterns. Studies
such as those using survey sample data that do not group pupils
into neighbourhoods and schools may miss these higher-level effects 
and may have led to the over-estimation of the proportion of
variance explained by individual and urban form variables.

4.2. Route distance from home to school

After taking sociospatial clustering within schools and neighbourhoods 
into account, distance from home to school was found
to be by far the strongest predictor of motorised travel, reducing
the DIC by 4184.6 This con<U+FB01>rms <U+FB01>ndings from international studies
on travel to school in the U.S. and Sweden (Johansson et al., 2012,
Mcdonald, 2008) and earlier studies in Britain (Rigby, 1979). As
implied by the boxplot in Fig. 2 above, the mean distances for
active (1.5 km) and motorised (3.9 km) travel were signi<U+FB01>cantly
different (t¼  98, df ¼ 25796, p ¼0.000, variances tested equal).
The mean distance from home to faith schools was signi<U+FB01>cantly
greater (3.45 km compared to 2 km for secular schools at
p¼ 0.000), which is unsurprising given that the two Catholic High
Schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld don’t have nominated de jure catchment areas
and therefore take pupils from across most of the city.

4.3. Gender
More boys walked or cycled to school than girls (the reference
group). This <U+FB01>nding accords with those studies reviewed by
Stewart (2011) where gender effects were identi<U+FB01>ed. Although
girls travelled slightly further to school (2.72 km) than boys
(2.67 km) on average, this difference was not found to be statistically 
signi<U+FB01>cant. However, further exploratory analysis showed a
signi<U+FB01>cant difference between the proportion of girls and boys
who attended a faith school7 (<U+03C7>2 ¼ 11.9 at 1 degree of freedom,
p¼ 0.001).
Excluding the two faith schools from the analysis, signi<U+FB01>cantly
fewer girls walked and signi<U+FB01>cantly more girls travelled to school
by car (including car-sharing). Previous research has highlighted
gender differences in the level of independence granted to children 
by parents (Hillman and Adams, 1992) which may involve
more restriction in public spaces and a higher level of supervision
(Stewart, 2011). Giving a child a lift rather than allowing them to
walk affords them less freedom to roam and provides increased
opportunity for parental surveillance. Johansson et al. (2012) also
found that Swedish boys were signi<U+FB01>cantly more likely to cycle
than girls. Among the tiny number (N ¼ 42, 0.2%) of pupils who
cycled to school in the study population8 the ratio of boys to girls
was over 4:1.

4.4. Age

Age was found to be positively correlated with distance travelled 
to school. Signi<U+FB01>cant differences were found between the
mean for 11 year olds (2.5 km) and older children-14 year olds
(2.74 km, p¼ 0.01) and 15-16 year olds (2.83 km, p ¼ 0.001). So

pupils aged 14–16, on average, travelled further to school in 2009–
10. This is due to a cohort effect as the school choices available in
Shef<U+FB01>eld when the children aged 14–16 in 2009–10 started high
school (i.e. 2004–2006) were different from those available to
pupils aged 11 in 2009–10 due to a planned school closure.
An interaction term age  distance to school was created in
order to take account of this interaction. Once this interaction term
was added into the model an inverse relationship between age and
walking to school was observed. This means that older high school
pupils were less likely, on average, to walk to school compared to
11–12 year olds once distance to school was taken into account. This
may be partly due to the well-documented increased changes in
sleep pattern associated with puberty (Carskadon, 2011, Foster and
Kreitzman, 2014) putting pressure on time in the mornings for
teenagers.

4.5. Ethnic group

The mean distance between home and school was tested for
different broad ethnic categories using analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
with a post-hoc Scheffe test (Table 3). All other ethnic groups
for which data were available were found to have travelled signi<U+FB01>cantly 
further to school than white British pupils in Shef<U+FB01>eld in
2009–10.
Exploring variation in mean distances to school using the more
detailed ethnic categories uncovered signi<U+FB01>cant heterogeneity
among pupils from Shef<U+FB01>eld’s different ethnic communities (Table 4). 
Of particular note is the fact that pupils from Black ethnic
groups travelled the furthest to school, at 4 km and over, compared 
to an average of 2.5 km for white British pupils. Further
analysis found that this was driven by a higher propensity for
pupils from the Afro-Caribbean and ‘African–Other’ groups to attend a 
Christian faith school, which has also been noted by other
researchers (Weekes-bernard. 2007). Somali pupils, however, did
not attend Christian schools, probably due to Islam being their
main religion of their community - yet on average these pupils
travelled the furthest of all. This may be partly due to the clustering 
of the Somali population in particularly deprived neighbourhoods in inner-city 
locations9 with access fewer schools
nearby.

4.6. Interaction between gender and ethnicity

A chi-squared test of mode of travel by gender by ethnic group
indicated that fewer girls from certain ethnic groups were recorded 
as actively commuting to school. Among pupils of Asian
descent, signi<U+FB01>cantly more girls travelled by car compared to boys
(<U+03C7>2 ¼23, d.f. ¼ 11, p ¼0.05), although no signi<U+FB01>cant difference was
found in distance from home to school for Asian boys and girls. In
some cultures girls may be perceived as more vulnerable or as
requiring greater ‘protection’ than boys. For example, Weekes-bernard 
(2007) presents the concerns of several ethnic minority
parents speci<U+FB01>cally with regards to escorting their daughters to
school.

4.7. Special educational need status

Until now, special educational need does not seem to have been
included or described as a relevant explanatory factor in studies of
travel to school. However, the <U+FB02>ag for SEN-statement or “school-
action plus” status, which applied to 457 pupils in this dataset, was
found to be signi<U+FB01>cantly inversely associated with walking or

cycling to school. A t-test on mean distance to school showed that
these SEN pupils travelled signi<U+FB01>cantly further than non-SEN pupils 
(means of 3.9 km and 2.7 km respectively). As mentioned
above, children with these types of SEN may be required to travel
further in order to access schools which are equipped to support
their particular needs. Although male pupils with this SEN <U+FB02>ag
outnumbered girls by 3:1, it was not possible to add an interaction
term between individual SEN status and distance to school or
gender into the multilevel model due to small pupil numbers.

4.8. Urban form variables

Although there has been a signi<U+FB01>cant focus on the impact of
urban form factors on commuting behaviour in recent years, the
model presented here suggests that urban form only explains a
very limited amount of the variation between pupils who commute 
by active and motorised means. The only urban form variable
which was found to be signi<U+FB01>cant was the density of cul-de-sacs
(no-through roads). Analysis showed that taking account of distance 
to school, pupils who lived closer to school in areas of high
cul-de-sac density, were more likely to engage in active commuting. 
This <U+FB01>nding is in opposition to <U+FB01>ndings from some studies
in the US (see for example Schlossberg et al., 2006) and likely
re<U+FB02>ects the differences in the detailed layout of suburban archetypes. 
In the US dead-end roads are typically not through routes
for pedestrians. However, post-war suburban expansion in Shef<U+FB01>eld, 
in common with many English cities, was based on variants
of the “Radburn” principle (Womersley, 1954), where road cul-de-sacs 
exist alongside a traversable network of walking routes.

4.9. Variables not in the model

The proportion of households without access to a car or van
was found to be of borderline signi<U+FB01>cance (it reduced the DIC by
only 4) with an inverse relationship to walking or cycling to
school. This implies that pupils living in areas with less access to
private transport were in fact more likely to use motorised travel.


However, as outlined above, area levels of no/low car access have
been found to be correlated with core indicators of deprivation
(Voas and Williamson, 2001), and further exploration using analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) exposed an interaction between ethnicity and 
levels of car ownership/access. Black Somali children were
found to live in the most “deprived” neighbourhoods as indicated
by the lowest levels of car access10. As noted above, Black Somali
pupils travelled the furthest to school on average. Pupils from the
lowest car access neighbourhoods were signi<U+FB01>cantly less likely to
cycle or walk, take a dedicated school-bus (many of which serve
faith schools), to car-share or take a tram, and more likely to more
likely to travel by car, use a public bus or bus of “unknown type”,
or travel by “other” means.
Pupil eligibility for free school meals (FSM status) was not
found to be signi<U+FB01>cant and school faith status and mean school
GCSE performance (Key Stage 4 statistics) were not found to be
signi<U+FB01>cant over and above the between school variation in the
model at the higher level.


5. Discussion and policy implications

The <U+FB01>ndings in this paper suggest that the predictors of active
school commuting are complex and conditioned by neighbourhood- 
and school-level factors as well as individual or household
characteristics. Initiatives promoting active commuting through,
for example, transport and urban design improvements will have
only limited effect if societal and sociospatial structures oblige
some groups of pupils to commute long distances-yet this is the
corollary of policies promoting school choice. The mismatch between 
education and transport policies has been discussed with
reference to the air quality impacts of school choice by Marshall
et al. (2010); this study provides further evidence of the mismatch
that can arise from school choice programmes.
It is also important to acknowledge that the home-school
commute is at the juncture of a number of different policy areas.
Joint working across education, housing and health policy domains 
as well as transport will be essential to make any real impact 
in terms of modal shift to active commuting, transport sustainability 
and associated future budgets for transport subsidies.
For example, in terms of distance to school, optimal school-siting
within appropriate population centres, school size, residential
planning and development and policies on parental choice are all
key factors. Policies on selective schools such as grammar and
denominational schools are also implicated, as these often draw
students from much wider catchment areas (Rigby, 1979, Taylor,
2002, Parsons et al., 2000).
Currently many educational policies are working in opposition
to sustainable transport goals of local travel and low carbon cities
by driving system-wide patterns of ‘excess commuting’ (Horner,
2002) to more distant schools. Such policies may also run counter
to public health objectives to increase physical exercise among
children and reduce exposure to environmental pollution. Policies
aimed at promoting active travel that do not recognise the intermediate 
bene<U+FB01>ts of modal switch to public transport (e.g. buses
and trains) may be unrealistic in a context of further school decentralisation, 
consolidation, and parental choice. A key priority,
therefore, is to ensure that transport planners who aim to encourage 
modal shift from private to public transport do not miss
the opportunity to work in tandem with public health of<U+FB01>cials to
focus on the bene<U+FB01>ts of public transport as a ‘mixed-mode’ form of
commuting which comprises both active and motorised
components.
The core <U+FB01>ndings of this study are that mode of travel (active
versus motorised commuting) is socially patterned within both
schools and neighbourhoods. Rates of active commuting vary
primarily by school, neighbourhood, and with the length of the
home-school commute. Furthermore distance to school has been
found to vary by pupil age and ethnic background. Motorised/active 
transport has been shown to vary by age, gender, ethnicity and
parental views on child independence and the need for escort
(which may be related to perceptions of neighbourhood safety).
In order to be successful, it is likely that transport policy goals
need to be grounded in the everyday reality of pupils’ travel to
school which includes taking account of route distance to school,
family schedules, parental concerns about road safety, neighbourhood 
safety and child safety. And importantly, given that
transport choices vary by neighbourhood, pupil gender, age and
ethnicity, blanket policies across entire schools or cities may not
be appropriate. In their stead more <U+FB02>exible and responsive measures 
need to be developed that aim to meet the expressed need of
individual communities. For example, the possibility of organising
appropriately chaperoned walking school buses speci<U+FB01>cally for
girls might be explored jointly with some ethnic communities,
where education escort is gender-biased. At the very least, it
suggests that detailed transport planning associated with schools
needs to recognise these factors. Whilst education planning in
England does require an element of cooperation with transport
planners at the individual school level (e.g. through the production
of statutory school travel plans), it is likely that better links between 
education, health, transport and land use policies (for
housing planning) are needed at the ‘macro’ (e.g., city-wide) level.
While the government’s Travelling to School Initiative had some
success, its evaluation found that improvements to child health
were far from transformative—one barrier, according to local stakeholders, 
being that travel distances implied by increased school
choice (DfE and DfT, 2010). Notably, revised statutory guidance for
school travel planning in England has resulted in a less prescriptive 
framework aimed at better re<U+FB02>ecting ‘the requirements
of today’s dynamic and increasingly autonomous schools system’
(DfE, 2014, para 2.1).
In the context of the considerable distances that some children
travel to school, walking all the way to school is unlikely to be
realistic aim (Mcdonald, 2008). Mixed-mode objectives may be
more appropriate in such circumstances: for example, campaigns
that encourage bus commuters to “walk an extra stop”, possibly in
combination with behavioural change incentives linked to bus fare
structures. On the other hand, educational travel subsidies may
provide perverse incentives, such as families deliberately opting
for more distant schools in order to qualify for a subsidised bus
pass. More in-depth, qualitative research into the reasons that
children travel long distances to school would be helpful to shed
light here.
Given the importance of socioeconomic factors associated with
distance travelled to school and modal choice, it is likely that
transport policies will impact differently on the educational outcomes 
of diverse sub-populations. Transport is not simply reacting
to ‘demand’ but rather an integral to societal frameworks of opportunity 
and constraint within which education choices are articulated. 
Increased pressure on public funding has already led to
the withdrawal of discretionary transport funding such as free bus
passes for children attending faith schools in some areas (Shef<U+FB01>eld
City Council, 2014). Since such schools may provide a viable alternative 
route to higher-performing schools for low-income families 
(Ferrari and Green, 2013), it seems likely that such decisions
would disproportionately affect those families and contribute to
worsening educational inequalities.

6. Conclusion

This paper has demonstrated that a range of individual pupil,
school-level and neighbourhood level factors are associated with
walking or being driven to school. Consistent with other studies,
the distance between home and school is found to be the most
signi<U+FB01>cant individual-level factor by far, although there are important 
correlates of distance that suggest systematic socio-economic 
variation in the geography of school commuting. At a
time when less than half of all English pupils attend their nearest
school, rates of active commuting are likely to decline further.
Given the public health bene<U+FB01>ts of increased active commuting
among children and reduced “excess” commuting by motorised
means, serious consideration is needed of the implications and
contradictions between education policies that promote parental
choice, public health policies seeking to reduce childhood obesity/
increase levels of physical activity, and environmental policies
aimed at reducing pollution and promoting sustainable transport.

6.1. Limitations and future research

The key limitation to studies of the type reported in this paper
is the lack of hard, measured data on the actual journeys to school
made by pupils. As noted at the outset, the model of travel variable
employed in this study has several limitations, although at present
it remains the most appropriate means by which travel mode can
be analysed within individual level models. It is important to note
that the question was removed from the School Census after 2011,
limiting the potential for future work in this area. Any future
studies aiming to consider the determinants of school travel behaviour 
aimed at evaluating the impact of competing national
policies would bene<U+FB01>t from the systematic inclusion of a small set
of pupil-level school travel indicators within the pupil census data.
There remains scope to further develop the speci<U+FB01>cation of multi-
level models to ensure that they are robust.