Pre-schoolers' transport imaginaries: Moving towards sustainable futures?                                                                                    

Being on the move is part of children's everyday life in cities. However, little is known about how young children
experience transport systems or their aspirations for mobility in cities. In this paper, we explore pre-schoolers'
experiences with the mobile world and show their affinity with different transport modes and hopes for their
current transport system. We draw on a participatory research project that engaged children in class discussions,
a tile-based city building exercise and neighbourhood walks. Findings suggest that although the voices of
children aged 3–5 years are absent in mobility or transport debates, children are fascinated by mobility and
transport related activities and services. Pre-schoolers from Dunedin, New Zealand, though recognising a predominantly 
motorised transport system, also showed creative or alternative modes making their way into their
own transport systems. In this paper we argue that children should be introduced to and experience alternative
modes of transport in the early years to allow for more imaginary transport geographies creating greater support
for more sustainable, liveable urban environments for all ages.

1. Introduction   
                                                                          
Primary school children and young people's voices are making increasing 
noise in transport related studies. Many studies to date have                      
elicited children and young people's experiences of being driven, using                     
buses, walking or cycling in urban environments - with a focus on their                     
journey to school being dominant (Wilson et al., 2018; Mitchell et al.,                     
2007; Fusco et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2012). However, little is known of                  
how very young children, aged 3–5 years, experience being mobile in                         
the modern transport environment (Templeton, 2018; Smith and                                
Kotsanas, 2014) or what their aspirations and hopes for mobility in                         
cities are. This paper, therefore, aims to bring young children's voices to                 
the fore, revealing pre-schoolers' understanding of their mobile worlds,                    
their affinity for different transport modes and indications of their                       
hopes for changes to their current transport system. We aim to extend                       
the current understanding of doing/being/thinking transport systems.                        
We assert that young children are already socialised in the predominantly 
motorised transport system they encounter on a daily basis                       
and thus we argue that young children should be introduced to and                           
experiment with alternative modes of transport in the early years to                        
allow for more imaginary transport geographies. Their altered imaginary 
geographies may address the need for more sustainable, liveable                      
urban environments for all ages. Values and norms internalised as pre-schoolers
 may shape future societies in a positive way.                                     
											
2. Transport and children's mobile urban worlds

In our contemporary, car dominated urban environments, children's
engagement with their environments and their mobilities are spatially
fragmented. Many children in auto-dependent societies spend most of
their time in ‘islands’ such as houses, schools, after-school-care and
leisure facilities scattered over the entire urban area and linked by
vehicle transport routes (Zeiher, 2003; Depeau et al., 2017). Parents
chaperone their children between these islands, which is especially
well-documented for the journey to and from school (Panter et al.,
2010; McMillan, 2007; Buliung et al., 2017). Many of these studies have
a health focus and address the energy expenditure of different transport
modes (Faulkner et al., 2009; Buttazzoni et al., 2019; Waygood et al.,
2015). In particular, studies look at distances to and destinations for as
well as preferred choices and constraints shaped by environmental and
social determinants for engaging in active transport modes (Mackett
and Paskins, 2008; Villanueva et al., 2013; Wilson et al., 2018). These
and many other studies point towards the influence of land-use mix,
traffic volume, distance, speed, street connectivity and parental fears of
‘stranger-danger’ on families' participation in active or motorised
transport to school (Foster et al., 2014; Mitra and Buliung, 2012;
Helbich et al., 2016). Similarly, whether children walk, cycle, take
public transport or are driven to school, afternoon or leisure activities
depends on perceptions of the local neighbourhood in terms of personal
and road safety, but also on parental aspirations to participate in local

or nonlocal extra-curricular activities (Holloway and Pimlott-Wilson,
2018; Hjorthol and Fyhri, 2009; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016), children's 
mobility impairments (Ross and Buliung, 2018; Stafford et al.,
2019) and seasons (Ergler et al., 2016; Harrison et al., 2017).
These mainly car-oriented practices to reach diverse destinations
create their own paradoxes beyond having societal implications, such as
fewer child and adult pedestrians being out and about (Laird, 2001;
Frank et al., 2006; Evans et al., 2012). The dominant symbolic and
practical value of motorised transport for reaching the different destination 
‘islands’ in urban environments is closely related to what Sheller
and Urry (2000: 747) called the “new urban subjectivities” constrained
by fragmentation and segregation of land use. The automobile provides
opportunities to experience a broader range of spaces but it also comes
with associations of power, prestige, and wealth (Urry, 2004; Gartman,
2004; Cresswell, 2011; Schwanen, 2016). It dominates the experience
of cities and as such the “coming together of private citizens in public
space is lost” (Sheller and Urry, 2000: 746). For example, some researchers 
have discussed children's longing for independent, active
transport, while highlighting their limited view and experience of the
world resulting from being passive passengers and users of supervised
indoor spaces (Riazi and Faulkner, 2018; Malone, 2007; Kearns et al.,
2003). However, for children, being a passenger not only impacts on
the availability of safe local play or walking affordances, but can also
determine the structure of the built environment and its walkability
(Holt et al., 2008; Kyttä et al., 2018). Often children's ‘coming together’
on their journey to school or in their neighbourhoods is, for example,
denied through car oriented urban design (Ergler, 2020; Villanueva
et al., 2013) or reliance on personalised motor transport (Mitchell et al.,
2007; Collins and Kearns, 2001; Pooley et al., 2005; Fusco et al., 2012).
Moreover, Waygood et al. (2017) showed in their comparative study
between Japan, Canada and Sweden that cultural elements - for example 
attendance of local neighbourhood schools - allow for independent 
active travel, which also plays a role in fostering social
community interactions. In other words, the reduction of child pedestrians 
due to the increase of parental chauffeuring across cities is an
outcome of the role of auto-mobility in modern societies and reduces
children's independent mobilities and often their familiarity with social
and environmental affordances (Villanueva et al., 2013; Schoeppe
et al., 2016; Riazi and Faulkner, 2018; Ergler et al., 2017). Thus, this
desire for or curse of the motorised transport is not only debilitating for
children in terms of their mobility practices now and in the future, but
also impacts on their environmental literacy and how they experience,
utilise and see their urban environment and its diverse affordances
(Ergler, 2020; Hopkins and Stephenson, 2014; Freeman, 2010; Kyttä
et al., 2018). Further, as we will show in this paper, car dependency
impacts on young children's understandings of, ideas about and attitudes 
towards their transport system in cities. In this regard, children's
travel socialisation plays an important role. Haustein et al. (2009) in
their work with young adults reveal that car use habits and mobility
behaviour is based on their travel socialisiation during childhood and
adolescence. However, children's norms, values and attitudes to transport 
are influenced not only by the attitudes, norms and values of their
socialisers (e.g. families, education facilities) (Kopnina, 2011; Eagly and
Chaiken, 1993; Borg et al., 2019; Ergler et al., 2013), but also by their
own experiences.

3. Mobility experiences of young children in urban environments

While, as we just outlined, there is quite a substantial body of research 
on especially primary school children, transport and mobilities,
little is known about how pre-schoolers experience, use and engage
with different modes of travel or their mobile worlds in cities. One
reason for this omission is that young children are invariably considered 
as dependent travellers (Smith and Kotsanas, 2014; Clement
and Waitt, 2018; Gustafson and van der Burgt, 2015), although the
concept of ‘independence’ in independent mobility for primary school

children has already been questioned (Mikkelsen and Christensen,
2009). Another reason is that very young children are seen as lacking
the competence to effectively articulate their city transport understandings 
and experiences.
The handful of studies that look at young children's mobilities directly 
or at the periphery reveal the access barriers and mobility issues
in or with young children's roaming spaces. For example, transport hubs
or road crossings do not cater for the needs of small feet or parents with
prams (Clement and Waitt, 2018; Smith and Kotsanas, 2014). Similarly,
Ergler et al. (2015) show 3–5 year olds as longing for safe and secure
routes to travel to destinations close to their homes. In their research,
the young children suggested including more sidewalks, traffic calming
measures or bike lanes in their local environment. Templeton (2018)
focused more on how 2–5 year olds' travel experiences shaped their
sense of belonging when they took the New York subway accompanied
by a caregiver to their early childhood centre or when they engaged
with ‘friends’ and ‘strangers’ during their walking, car, bus or tram
trips. Walking with pre-schoolers can reveal their local wellbeing affordances 
(Ergler et al. in press). Studies, mainly set within the context
of mobile pre-schools, demonstrate this through the focus on the embodied 
and sensory experiences of pre-schoolers revealing, for example,
that being on the move can be a playful encounter with their human
and non-human surroundings (Gustafson and van der Burgt, 2015;
Ekman Ladru and Gustafson, 2018; Eriksson and Sand, 2018; Eriksson
and Sand, 2017; Smith and Kotsanas, 2014). All in all, these studies
already suggest that young children's experiences of being on the move
leaves a remarkable impact on their identity formation, their connection 
with the human and non-human world and aspirations for improving 
their travel experiences. However, to our knowledge no study
so far has looked into pre-schoolers' connections with their transport
system, their relationships with the mobile world and how their current
urban experiences shape their understanding of what is possible in a
transport system beyond their knowledge about the environmental
impact of various modes of transport (Borg et al., 2019). We aimed
therefore to investigate young children's socialisation into the transport
system of their cities.

4. Starting points: the need for sustainable, liveable cities for
expanding children's imaginary horizon

Normalising active transport, independent mobility and use of
public transport in which social interaction cannot be avoided can be
part of a healthy city childhood (Freeman and Tranter, 2011; Ergler
et al., 2017). Cities are recognising the need to redress the balance in
favour of people over cars (Gehl, 2013). Here we reference two examples 
where children experience alternative ways of interacting with
their city, interaction we argue is a prerequisite for imagining their city
in new ways. However, to be able to see beyond the norm, it is important 
to expand children's geographical imaginations – their imaginary 
horizon – as implied by the two following examples. Firstly, in
an environment that is pedestrian rather than car dominated (Barcelona's 
Superilles) children experience playful encounters with their
urban world. Secondly, where children from an early age are exposed to
vehicular transport but in ways that are confirming (Susilo and
Waygood, 2012; Christensen et al., 2011; Nansen et al., 2017). In this
second example, Japanese children learn in a scaffolded way to negotiate 
the challenges of transport whist simultaneously developing
their own independent mobility and creating a different relationship
with their environment (Waygood et al., 2015). As such, we suggest
that these different encounters then allow children to expand their visions 
of and for their environments; it expands their geographical
imaginaries and may alter their travel socialisation in later years when
applied to countries other than Spain or Japan.

4.1. The Barcelona Superilles

The problem the Superilles were designed to addressed are neatly
summed up as follows:
Barcelona today has a density of 7000 vehicles per square kilometre—by 
comparison with 3000 in Madrid, 1500 in Paris, and 1200 in
London—which has dire effects on spatial justice and health. More than
60% of public space is given over to cars, even though they are only
used for 20% of movements around the city, and the average occupation 
per vehicle is just 1.2 people. Every year, more than 700 people die
prematurely because of air pollution, which is well above the limits set
by the WHO (Bravo, 2018).
Since the initiation of the superblocks or Superilles, streets have
prioritised pedestrianisation (car use has reduced by 75%), with increased 
incorporation of social features such as seating, playgrounds,
picnic areas, sports facilities and markets. The changes mean young
children can experience the street as a playful social space, enhance
their own independent mobility and socialise more easily with people
outside their immediate friends and family.

4.2. Japan's approach to independent mobility

Although pedestrianisation and reduction of car dominance is always 
welcomed, children do have to learn to negotiate roads and associated 
traffic hazards. Removal of children from the streets to ensure
their safety, while understandable, is not necessarily in children's best
interests long-term (Freeman and Tranter, 2011). Their removal unfortunately 
reinforces the notion that streets are car spaces and drivers
internalise their dominant position. In many western cities, such as in
Dunedin in which this study took place, young children would not
normally be seen using streets independent of adults. However, Japan
has adopted a rather different approach (Hoy, 2015; Japan info. 2017,
Waygood et al., 2017; Drianda and Kinoshita, 2011) where young
children are encouraged to undertake journeys independently as part of
their maturation and environmental learning. This process, for example, 
is fostered through the Japanese version of a walking school bus
where since the 1960s older primary school children have led a group
of about 10 children to their neighbourhood school (Waygood et al.,
2015). However, Japanese children are also encouraged to be independent 
outside institutionalised settings as has been captured on a
much-loved TV programme Hajimete no Otsukai (First Errand) where
young children (from aged 2 upwards) are clandestinely filmed whilst
undertaking their first errand. The children show remarkable competence 
in negotiating the streets, some take public transport and their
growth in confidence is apparent as their journeys proceed. What is also
apparent is the societal nurturing of independence and the role of its
members in helping and looking out for children (Drianda and
Kinoshita, 2011; Susilo and Waygood, 2012; Waygood et al., 2017). To
succeed in cities children need to have safer cities, develop their wayfinding 
skills and be able to rely on social support when out.
All children though, not just in Japan, need to learn to negotiate
their environments if they are to become fully functioning citizens. A
combination of children's mobility capacity building and safer streets is
critical in this respect. The children in Fig. 1 are heading in the direction 
of the underground station on their way home after visiting
Vauxhall City Farm in London. If they use the London underground/
subway, they internalise the use of public transport as normal and see
walking to public transport as ordinary. It is an experience they could
not have through going on a chartered bus from school to the farm. Enroute 
they will also have opportunities to observe and possibly interact
with other people and activities happening along their way (Waygood
et al., 2017; Mitchell et al., 2007; Horton et al., 2014).
Similarly, when singer Ed Sheeran came to Dunedin the city square
became a pedestrianised zone with public gatherings including cultural
performances enabling children, such as the girls in Fig. 2, to experience 
the central square as a culturally vibrant, safe space rather than as

the traffic island it normally is. Dutch children's current attitudes and
behaviour to cars have been demonstrated to influence their future car
ownership aspirations (Kopina, 2011; Kopina and Williams, 2012).
Without positive and diverse mobility experiences children can find
it hard to conceptualise different, more supportive, transport environments. 
In other words, these experiences create diverse transport imaginaries. 
In our study, we were interested to see how transportation
would be reflected in the experiences of using cities and imagining a
city from scratch in our young participants.

5. Study location

The study took place in Dunedin, New Zealand, a reasonably compact 
city, located in the South Island of New Zealand that has about
120,000 citizens. The city has an area of 3314.8 km2 and city-proper of
255 km2. City dwellers are dominantly of Pakeha/NZ European origin,
other populations include Maori, Asians including Chinese, Pacific
Islanders and recent immigrants and refugees. Most of these demographics 
were reflected in the 27 study participants aged 3–5 years. The
sea in the east and hills in the west of the city define the city's geographical 
area. The inner city, which is surrounded by higher and lower
socio-economic suburbs, is thriving and currently being refurbished and
rejuvenated. The vibrant city centre acts as a bus hub for all suburban
buses. Smaller shopping areas often form the hearts of the suburbs,
which are dominated by free standing houses. There are no out of town
or peripheral shopping malls, shops are in the city centre or in suburban
local centres. Within the city there is a very limited highway/motorway
network and most city roads have footpaths/sidewalks. The majority of
suburbs have access to play areas such as playgrounds, sport fields,
parks and green spaces within walking distance and educational facilities 
and other health and basic services are a short walk, bus or car ride
away.
Car ownership in Dunedin is high with 40.5% of households owning
one car, 48% two or more with only 11% approx. not having access to a
car. Therefore, the major mode of transport in the city is by car with
62% of people either driving their own motorised vehicle to work or
being a passenger in a car, truck or van, but some people (1%) cycle,
walk or jog (7%) and some (5%) use the bus network to get to work,
although it is generally perceived as infrequent and unaffordable
(Dunedin City Council, n.d). Electric bikes, which can cope with the
steep hills, are becoming increasingly popular in the city, some have
children's carts attached. The walkscore for Dunedin's suburbs varies
between 98 for the central city to 4 for the outer suburbs. Walkability
and access are affected by the very steep topography in parts of the city.
One of the city's tourist attractions was – (until it lost its' title in 2019 to
a street in Wales) the world's steepest street. The Dunedin City Council
is committed to move towards introducing a more sustainable transport
system by supporting and encouraging alternative modes of transport.
The government transport agency is currently helping create a network
of cycle ways and improved pedestrian connections and is increasing
investment in the public transport system (Dunedin City Council, 2019;
Otago Regional Council, 2018).

6. Research design

The data presented is derived from the Dunedin pre-schooler city
mapping project (Ergler et al., 2015; Freeman et al., 2017), which has
been approved by the Human Ethics Committee at the University of
Otago (15/115). We worked with 27 children aged 3–5 years from three
Dunedin early childhood centres (see Table 1). The participating centres 
cater for a range of different social classes and backgrounds and are
located in low, medium and high deprivation areas. The 11 girls and 16
boys who participated in the study reflected the general ethnic and
socio-economic mix of the city. All participants were able bodied and
dominantly chauffeured to destinations representing the car-dominated
travel habits of Dunedin. The majority of children from the medium and

high socio-economic areas also have visited places outside Dunedin by
plane and some rode trams, subways, trains, bicycles in the places they
visited. A minority of participants cycled or took the public bus to get to
destinations within Dunedin from all three centres.
To gain insights in pre-schoolers' urban experiences, we followed a
right-based study design (Bessell, 2017). Our approach included not
only gaining consent for children's participation from parents and
centres, but we ensured that children consented themselves both
verbally and through their body language to the three different

methods we employed, not only before the data collection commenced,
but throughout the entire data collection process. The three methods
used in this project included first the invitation to pre-schoolers to
participate in a class discussion about their general city experiences,
which also covered activities they enjoy doing on weekdays and
weekends and ‘things’ they would like to see changed in their city. The
second method comprised the creation of their ‘ideal’ city using premade 
tiles (Freeman et al., 2017). Children were asked to build individual cities 
(one pair coproduced a city) on large carpet squares

using common city features such as houses, roads, cars, parks and
playgrounds (see Fig. 3). To ensure we did not pre-determine their cities, 
children had to ask for tiles and when a feature was unavailable
they could draw it on a blank tile. While many children built their cities
based on their experiences growing up in Dunedin, and therefore included 
many city features, they also added additional aspects that
hinted at their visions for cities.
In addition to the two methods taking place in the early childhood
centres, 10 children were given parental permission and themselves
agreed to take us on a neighbourhood walk and show us their favourite
and less loved places and activities in their local environment. While
parents were invited to accompany their children, we encouraged the
pre-schoolers to lead the walk and the discussions en-route. To capture
the walks, which lasted between 20 min to an hour and half, children
were invited to take pictures or asked us to take photos (using an iPad)
of social and environmental affordances (Kytta, 2004; Heft, 1988;
Ergler, 2020), people and locations that were meaningful for them
(Ergler et al. in press). All discussions were digitally recorded and then
transcribed. To analyse the verbatim and visual data, we looked
through the initial transcripts, photos and videos and noted down interesting 
topics and themes. In a second step, we coded photos, video
stills and transcripts thematically (Braun and Clarke, 2006; Ergler et al.

in press). We further analysed children's cities in two ways. We developed 
a scoring system that showed that the children's maps were neither 
simplistic nor random (Freeman et al., 2017). Children built their
cities with a purpose and links in mind for the different city features,
such as transport, where they, for example, placed roads, traffic lights
and cars together. Then we further conducted simple frequency counts
and engaged in descriptive statistics.

7. Fascination with the mobile world or replicating a traditional
auto-dominant city?

The three to five year olds exhibited a deep passion for and fascination 
with motorised transport in their cities by replicating and regurgitating 
the system of automobility (Urry, 2004). Our participants
showed in their cities, during the walks and the mat discussions that
they had embodied the centrality of the motorised transport system
they encountered in Dunedin on a daily basis. They bought into and
rarely deviated from, normalised, auto-dominant practices of the contemporary 
transport system in Dunedin. In the following sections we go
into more detail regarding the role automobility plays in how children
experienced and viewed mobility in Dunedin and built their cities.
single tiles used by all children.

7.1. Transport dominates young children's cities

Transport was the key city activity recognised by children, which
was determined by counting the total number of tiles children placed on
their cities and categorizing these tiles into different feature classes. The
children clearly selected motorised transports as their primary transport
mode. In rank order by general feature classes children used 1871
transport related tiles; 800 Transport modes (e.g. bus, car, bicycle,
plane), 649 road features (e.g. straight road, curved road, cycle way),
259 road signage (e.g. stop sign, traffic light), 163 service transport
(e.g. petrol station, train station, airport) (see Figs. 4 and 5); next was
nature at 631 tiles, housing at 470 tiles and people at 441 tiles.
Transport has almost three times as many selections as the next group,

nature related items and activities. No significant differences could be
observed for male and female participants selecting transport modes
and road features. These categories have the highest counts for both
girls and boys. Girls selected 313 transport mode tiles and 286 road
feature tiles, whereas the boys used 487 and 363 tiles for the same
categories followed by nature (girls: 309 tiles, boys: 322 tiles), housing
(girls: 277 tiles, boys: 193 tiles) and people (girls: 252 tiles, boys: 189
tiles). The only tile feature that boys used considerably more of was
emergency services (girls: 81 tiles, boys: 177 tiles). These feature
classes show not only that children are able to recognise the key elements 
of a functioning city, such as transport, nature, people, housing
and services (Freeman et al., 2017), but also that transport and mobility
play a leading role in young children's cities with transport modes (e.g.

cars, trucks, bicycles, planes) leading their selection choice (see Figs. 4,
5 and 6).
The participants often picked a transport related feature first or
early on during the city creation process. When they were building their
cities, 18 (8 girls, 10 boys) of the 27 children selected a transport feature 
such as roads, cars, bikes or traffic lights as the first item they put

on their city. Some 15 (5 girls, 10 boys) selected a transport feature as
their second tile and 17 (6 girls, 11 boys) used a transport item as their
third choice, whereas 13 (5 girls, 8 boys) and 12 (3 girls, 9 boys)
children selected a transport feature as their fourth and fifth tile respectively. 
So, at least half of the children and at times even more selected 
transport related features very early on in building their cities

irrespective of their gender. Transport type tiles were often selected
alongside other city feature tiles. Only one boy picked transport related
tiles for all his first five placement types, two children (1 girl, 1 boy) for
their first four choices and five participants (2 girls, 3 boys) for their
first three choices. Fig. 6 illustrates a city heavily dominated by vehicles
from the outset of the city building activity. This dominance remains
throughout the cities children created, with further transport modes
introduced and utilised to connect people to houses and various locations 
as for example illustrated in Fig. 7. From analysing these findings,
we interpret this observation to mean that motorised transport is in
children's eyes the normal way to get people and goods from A to B in
their cities; but transport also enables people to connect to places
constituting the ‘good life’ or ‘livingness’ in urban environments. Motorised 
transport frames the backdrop to mobile lives (Sheller and Urry,
2000; Freeman and Quigg, 2009; Lin, 2018).

7.2. Embodying the dominance of motorised transport: norms, fun and
safety

Young children dominantly embodied the current ubiquity and necessity 
of individual, motorised transport in cities. For our participants,
cities are comprised of ‘people, cars and houses’ - as one child in the
mat-based discussion simply put it. Cars are an essential feature of a
city's picture and children frequently explained that they need to build
roads and place cars in their cities as you get around in cities “by cars”
or they justified the placing of “cars” in their cities, “because people
drive”. Others simply said, cities need “roads…and cars, because they
drive on the roads”. Cars are essential for cities “so that the city is full”,
and “just need them [cars]”. One boy, Markes, for example, told us that
he wants to place all cars available in his city “because everybody here
has cars”. Fig. 8 graphically represents the dominance many children
placed on cars and other road-based transport methods. In this city cars
are adjacent to houses, with people noticeably absent from roadside
spaces. Rather, roads are filled with cars, while people are near houses
or in undesignated periphery spaces.
Cars are part of and play an important role in young children's lives
for getting them and other family members to and from their kindergarten, 
shops, or attending extra-curricular activities. Therefore, it is
not surprising that cars featured so dominantly in their cities as being
the norm in a urban transport system (Urry, 2004; Freeman and
Tranter, 2011). However, when we dug a bit deeper into their reasoning, 
children started to address more explicitly the normalised way
of the auto-dominant city and car ownership. Mabel, for example, said
that she ‘needs some cars….[be]cause Dads have to have cars’ and
Andrew demanded ‘lots of cars…be]cause there are lots of houses and
every house needs a car’. Moreover, the young children were also aware
that motorised transport can ease the travel between destinations for
different reasons. Some children, like Ethan, highlighted that cars can
traverse long distances:
Researcher: Why do we need more cars?
Ethan: Because it is a long way, we can't walk though…I need more
cars!

Similarly, Ayla explained that people travel in cars “[be]cause they
cannot walk…it is too far sometimes” for utilising a desired affordance
in a park, at the beach or a playground. Related to the ease of traveling
long distances by car, automobiles are also convenient for overcoming
topographical issues as Andrew told us: cars “can go up and down” hills.
But you can also transport “lots of things” in the car as Jovan revealed 
and big cars allow for the chauffeuring of children, as Ayla
highlighted “[b]ecause some people have many children”. Similarly,
another child noted that cars were needed, perhaps over bikes, although 
he used bikes for “fun”, “[be]cause everyone can fit in it [the
car]”. Moreover, children emphasised the need for trucks and service
vehicles to keep the city running as they “see them on the road”.

Children asked, for example, for “workmen trucks” or trucks “for the
people”. But trucks also “carry big stuffs, like ships” or “bring cars”,
while fire trucks are “needed for fire” and the ambulances are there
“when somebody is sick” or “has a broken leg”. Nick simply summarised 
the role of emergency vehicles in cities as follows: “Fire truck is
important for fire and police cars is important for catching bad people
and ambulance for dead people”. Clearly, children are aware of the
different service vehicles and the role these trucks play for the functioning 
of a city.
The young participants not only placed importance on motorised
transport when they built their cities, but they also, during the mat
discussions, revealed the current importance of vehicular transport for
getting people to different destinations.

Children talking over each other: Car, Airplane, helicopter
Researcher: Who travelled with an airplane?
Children talking over each other: Went to Australia, Christchurch.
Researcher: How else do you travel around the city?
Nick: On the taxi.
Harry: By car.

Motorised transport makes people mobile in their cities, but also
connects them with other cities within New Zealand and the rest of the
world or as one child put it “to fly to the world”. Planes and airports in
particular carried the meaning of connecting their small country in the
Southern Part of The Pacific Ocean to the rest of the world as the following 
excerpts suggest.

Children talking over each other: Car, Airplane, helicopter
Researcher: Who travelled with an airplane?
Children talking over each other: Went to Australia, Christchurch.
Researcher: How else do you travel around the city?
Nick: On the taxi.
Harry: By car.

Children connected going on holidays, seeing family members and
the freedom to travel to a place you are unfamiliar with and want to
explore and utilise its affordances. Planes carried the exoticness of the
far world and were frequently observable objects in the sky of Dunedin.

Researcher: Why do we need some planes?
Ethan: To fly somewhere far…[people] can go to any country where
they want to go.
Researcher: What do we need airplanes for?
Raphael: To fly to Australia.
Researcher: Ok and where do people go on airplanes?
Markes: Where their families are.
Researcher: Where do people go on planes?
Jack: “To Auckland and stuff.”
The young children shared with us not only the need for cars in
urban environments to get around in their cities, but they also highlighted 
the importance of planes to connect with the wider world.
Moreover, they also alerted us to their joy of watching motorised traffic,
in particular cars, trucks and trains. Observing or looking at motor
vehicles was an enjoyable activity for some of the participants.
Two boys in particular, revealed their fascination with cars, trucks
or diggers during the neighbourhood walk. Fig. 9 indicates that one of
the boys took us along a busy city highway and across a bridge to observe 
the cars, buses, trucks and diggers.

Timothy: Usually go across the bridge. We will find the diggers.
Researcher: What do you like about diggers?
Timothy: They make holes.
Researcher: What do you like when you walk?
Timothy: See the fire trucks.

Researcher: Do you like trucks?
Timothy: Loading ones…we are getting near to bridge!

Timothy, as his grandmother revealed, is able to spend hours just
sitting down on a bench or standing on the bridge and looking at vehicles 
passing or observing the construction site that changed the access
to the highway when the neighbourhood walk was conducted. Timothy
was fascinated with big trucks coming and going, diggers excavating
the road and other service cars coming in and dropping materials and
people. The family even bring drinks and snacks to be able to stay for as
long as Timothy wants and observe the happening. Timothy seems
fascinated by technical things and explained to us that if we want to
watch cruise and cargo ships we need to drive to Port Chalmers. He also
debated with us whether the steam train mainly running with tourists
one or two times a day in the high season will be on schedule. During
this brief encounter, he also made sure we knew where the trains are
housed when not on the move. In contrast, Julia paid more attention to
the aesthetics of motorised transport and alerted us to the fun of looking
at different coloured cars while walking past them during our

neighbourhood stroll.

Researcher: What do you like?
Julia: I like purple, green, red cars…I like blue ones as well … and I
like golden cars! [Julia pointed to different coloured cars, while
walking past them].

These experiences shape children's attitudes about motorised
transport and inform their values.
However, children not only revealed the embodied and normalised
practices of vehicle transport in urban environments and the fun some
associated with it, but they also exposed how deeply safety issues are
entrenched in their urban mobility experiences. Children grabbed our
hands when we came to cross a road during the walks or they were
reminded by parents to stop at the edge of the sidewalk and wait for us
before walking across. Being cautious of motorised transport has been
inculcated in children from an early age, which then also translated into
their own model cities as the following excerpts indicate.

Andrew: Here is the traffic light.
Researcher: Need more?
Andrew: Yes. Sometime I see them when it is green men you can
cross the road but when red men flash again it means you finish
crossing close. Do you have crossing?
Researcher: I have these crossing [zebra crossing].
Andrew: I have seen some of these….
Researcher: You can draw on them the green men.
Andrew: Yes this green man has legs and when it is there you can
cross.
Researcher: Anything else you want from these boxes?
Julia: Stop signs.
Researcher: Why do we need stop signs?
Julia: Because people stop when they drive…We need to put them in
front of the car. And in front of the ice cream shop.
Researcher: Why do we need traffic lights?
Ayla: So that people can go and stop. When people see this people
crossing and car going.
Researcher: Why is that?
Ayla: Because people might watch.
Researcher: Why do we need footpaths [sidewalks]?
Erin: For walk because of the cars.
Jovan: Footpaths [sidewalks].
Researcher: Why do we need footpaths [sidewalks]?
Jovan: So that people can walk.
But children were also coconscious of the dangers within motorised
transportation.
Researcher: Why do we need traffic lights?
Jack: To stop the cars.
Researcher: What will happen if we don't have traffic lights?
Jack: They just go and crash. They crash into cars.

These excerpts show that young children are not only wary of motorised 
transport, but learn from an early age that pedestrians are secondary 
users of most spaces and need to be protected by traffic calming
mechanisms such as pedestrian crossings and traffic lights (Bianchetti
and Sampieri, 2014). (See Figs. 6 and 7 for an example of how children
often used traffic calming mechanisms). Another interesting strategy
many children used was to use areas between road networks for locating 
people or green spaces, signalling an understanding that some
areas are purposefully designed without cars and roads. The child who
created the city in Fig. 10 clearly does this, with a designated green-space 
in the centre of her city, where trees and flowers grow and where
animals are present. Similarly, Figs. 6 and 7 also show road networks
without people and areas of housing and people without roads through
them. This illustrates an understanding that they recognise that there
are pedestrianised spaces in a vehicle dominated city like Dunedin.
The examples discussed here point to four important aspects all
participating children discussed with us. First, pre-schoolers generally
had a positive attitude towards cars and other motorised vehicles irrespective 
of the different modes they personally engage with for travel
(see also Kopina and Williams, 2012). Second, motorised transport is
essential for reaching different destinations and making use of the
available social and environmental affordances within a city and beyond 
(Whitzman et al., 2010). Third, the sheer movement of motorised
transport is fascinating, mysterious and fun, while simultaneously recognising 
and being aware of the associated dangers of motorised vehicles 
(Tranter, 2010). Fourth, the colourful cars driving through the
city make the city more fun. Colourful urban environments have a high
standing on children's agendas, although mainly discussed in relation to
colourful nature experiences (Ergler et al., 2015; Freeman and Tranter,
2011).

7.3. Young children's views on alternative transport modes: glimpses of
hope?

Our young participants made it very clear that cars, trucks and utes
(pick-up trucks) are essential for keeping the city running and for
moving people and goods around. They clearly noticed and replicated
in their imagined cities the current urban design of their actual city and
many others that are based on individual motorised transport receiving
preferential treatment in terms of public investment and space allocation. 
Thus, their discussions and the views they voiced on alternative
modes, such as public transport or active transport, carried different
connotations, if they featured at all in their discussions.
While some children explicitly highlighted the need for compact
cities with diverse destinations in walking distance or shared that they
“enjoy walking” to ‘Kindy’ [early childhood education centre, short for
Kindergarten] and other destinations, others alerted us during the mat
discussions that they only walk “on the snowing day […as] it is slippery
for cars”. Being a car passenger seems to be the norm for the majority of
children. Many children do not walk beyond getting into the car or from
the parking space to their destinations, which lays the foundation for
their car-centred perspective (Mitchell et al., 2007; Collins et al., 2009;
Haustein et al., 2009). However, they are still aware of people walking
when they pass them in their vehicle as the majority placed sidewalks
and people walking on sidewalks in their cities. Their reasoning was
“that people can walk” or “people walk on concrete”. All the children
who took us on a walk around their neighbourhood alerted us to sensory 
affordances and possibilities that come from paying attention to
the micro-cosmos of their neighbourhood (Ergler et al. in press). One
boy connected walking with a mode of transport that allowed him to
pet cats along the way. While walking was a frequent part in the conversations 
with children, it seemed that walking was a matter of fact in
cities and many did not engage explicitly with the benefits of walking,
such as increased physical activity or environmental literacy (Malone,
2007; Riazi and Faulkner, 2018), at all. Children exhibited a similar
matter-of-fact engagement with public transport.
While many of the children placed a bus in their city, they were a bit
more ambivalent about their use and who is a frequent user. Some of
the children took a bus to kindergarten and saw public transport as an
important part of their city's transport system. Others linked buses more
to ‘school buses’ “taking children to school”, while one boy considered
buses as a convenient way to get “home when you come back from a
tramping [hiking] trip”. In contrast, Andrew suggested that “there is no
need of buses, because my Mom and Dad takes a car to drive”. While
Andrew disregarded the need of a public transport system outright,
other children focused more on the low status of bus passengers and
disregarded their use upon this basis. Benjamin, for example, started off
with the positive aspect of buses “taking people to different places when
people don't have cars”, but then he also reminded us of the notion of
the bus as a ‘loser cruiser’ (Fitt, 2018). Benjamin told us people take the
bus when they “waste their money and they don't have enough money”.
While the participating children often had something to say about
public transport by bus, they were comparatively silent when it came to
reasoning the need for a tram or train connection, although they enjoyed 
putting train tracks, stations and trains in their cities. One reason
may be that Dunedin does not have a tram or train system as part of the
public transport system, but does have a scenic railway catering to
tourists. One participant, Jack, when asked about his placement of train
tracks and whether we need them in the city initially denied the need
for train tracks in the city area, however, upon further reflection stated
that trains are actually needed “if they [people] go to the different place
they can go on the train. Or they can go in the car.” This quote illustrates 
that rather than trains being used for transport within an urban
area, in Dunedin the perception is that trains are for transport to other

places.
Children associated biking, scootering and skateboarding with being
a fun and leisure activity rather than for getting from A to B per se.
Nonetheless, a few children rode their bikes to or scootered to kindergarten 
and other destinations. Jack for example, showed us where they
store bikes in his education facility and George proudly told us that she
rides her “new dragon scooter” to Kindy, while Alex revealed that he
sits “on the back of the bike while my dad rides it [to the Saturday
Farmer's Market]”. Jessica simply wanted bikes “for the people”
without going into any further detail as to why bikes are needed. In
contrast, Andrew placed bikes in his city because he “see[s] bikes on the
road”. However, for the majority biking, scootering or skateboarding
was a playful, fun activity you do in the afternoon or weekends. Some
children went to special places like “the tennis court”, “the park” or
“footpaths [sidewalks]” for a safe ride, while others focused more on
the benefits and enjoyable aspects of biking, scootering and skateboarding. 
Andrew for example asked us “Do you know riding skateboards 
and riding bike is also sports” and Ethan told us that bikes “give
you energy” and others revealed that bikes “are fun” during the walks.
These examples clearly demonstrate that children replicate the
motor vehicle dominant transport system they encounter on a daily
basis. They put their experiences to work when building and discussing
their cities. To ensure they can engage in alternative visions for transport 
we conclude that children need to be exposed to alternative modes
of transport at a young age as only a few children discussed alternative
transport visions. For example, although not a realistic transport possibility, 
one boy suggested having big dogs to ride around in cities and
another one suggested having a helicopter service to “take us on a ride”.
A rocket ship also featured among the alternative suggestions. In contrast, 
the demand for a tram system was less explicitly verbalised, but
children nonetheless included trains in their visions. Those who discussed 
the necessity of train transportation had generally been on a
train or had watched trains previously. One participant who went on a
family train trip had an intimate knowledge of how they operated and
wanted a lever so that their movements could be controlled and they
could go in different directions:

Jack: “Are there different train tracks?”
Researcher: Why do you want different ones?
Jack: “For turning.”
Researcher: You can draw some if you want?
[Draws a lever]: “For turning the tracks.”
Researcher: You know a lot about train tracks don't you?
Jack: “They're the only thing I know. I went on a train one time
when I was four.”

To be able to move away from simply regurgitating the known and
engage creatively and playfully with the future of the transport system,
exposure to and the experiencing of alternative modes is important.
Those children more exposed to alternative transport options appeared 
more confident while leading the neighbourhood walks. The
child who took the researcher on the longest walk, both in terms of
distance and time, often participated in nature walks through the same
reserve with their kindergarten, which was located nearby. In addition,
his mother often took him for additional walks throughout the week.
This child was extremely confident about the route to take, even though
there were multiple different paths to choose from throughout the bush
walk. He directed the route throughout with very little input from his
mother. In contrast, some of the children were less confident and it was
clear that they were less familiar with their neighbourhood. Children
who walked to kindergarten regularly were able to navigate the route,
and able to orientate themselves very well. This illustrates the importance 
of children knowing their neighbourhoods intimately through
pedestrianisation, whereas auto transport modes appear to give children 
less ability to orient themselves.

8. Conclusion

We have argued that children need to be introduced to and experiment 
with alternative modes of transport in their early years to be
able to imagine alternative city futures to install the desire and hope for
moving away from the auto-dominant city and towards more sustainable, 
liveable urban environments. In doing so, we have made the
voices of an absent cohort in mobility or transport debates heard. These
voices showed that it is important to gain insights into and understand
very young children's conceptualisations and understandings of their
current transport system as our participants replicated and regurgitated
the dominance of the automobility system (Urry, 2004). They embodied, 
even at their young age, the auto-dominant city; they already
believe that motorised transport is important for keeping their city
physically and socially running. Therefore, it is not surprising that vehicles 
and the infrastructure they need as well as the perceived inferiority 
of active and public transport dominated children's maps and
the discussions. Children's experiences shaped their attitudes towards
alternative modes of transport and their values. Moreover, children
exhibited a fascination with mobility and transport related activities
and services that seems to have lasting impressions given the remaining
dominance of the vehicle transport and in many places resistance to
change beyond flagship examples such as the Superilles in Spain. Although 
young children recreated and were fascinated by the auto-dominant 
city, some suggested hopeful interventions as glimpses of
creative or alternative modes made their way into their idealised
transport system as the inclusion of scooters, cycles and the example
with the dog indicated. However, these examples were usually suggested 
by children who already experience the city differently such as
being a cyclist, bus or bike passenger. On such foundations, we suggest
that in order to extend the current understanding of doing/being/
thinking transport systems, children need to be exposed to and be allowed 
to experiment with alternative modes of transport in their early
years to enhance their imaginary horizons. We suggest awareness
raising campaigns should be undertaken to encourage parents and
caregivers to expose children to a diversity of transport modes in their
early years as socialisation plays and important role in young children's
capacity building and intellectual potential. However, occasional outings 
using alternative modes should just be the beginning for changing
current travel practices and allowing for a diversity of transport imaginaries. 
Alternative forms of transport education and experimental
learning should also be introduced in early childhood centres to pay
tribute to the fact that attitudes, norms and values are already developed 
in the early years of a child's life (Borg et al., 2019; Haustein et al.,
2009).
In conclusion, our study is the first to create a platform for adults to
use in listening to young children's experiences and to reveal children's
embodiment of the dominant transport norms and their attitudes towards 
different modes of transport through their own lived experiences.
In future, to unpack the differences between cities and gain more indepth 
insights in young children's experiences, understandings and visions 
for their transport system much more research is required – not
only for young able bodied children, but pre-school aged children with
a range of abilities and from different socio-cultural contexts as well as
children being exposed to a diversity of urban forms, transport modes
and transport cultures.