Promoting active transportation modes in school trips

Urban and transportation planners have put a special focus on students' health and <U+FB01>tness in the past
decade, however they struggle to <U+FB01>nd effective policies to promote walking and biking for school trips.
Commuting to school is an opportunity to embed a regular physical activity in students' daily routines
and prevent many health issues that are stimulated by physical inactivity during childhood. A three level
nested logit model is introduced to explain the motives behind school trip modal selection. Four choice
situations, namely walking, driving, school busing, and taking public transit are considered. This study,
particularly, underscored the signi<U+FB01>cance of model misspeci<U+FB01>cation in terms of policy outcomes, since
multinomial logit models are typically adopted in the literature and have strong and, in many cases,
unrealistic assumptions. Elasticity analysis of the MNL model showed an indirect elasticity of vehicle
ownership of  0.13 for non-automobile modes, while NL model provides different elasticities of  0.12,
 0.20 and  0.08, respectively for public, school bus, and walk modes. This misspeci<U+FB01>cation results in
over estimating the reduction in the share of students who walk to school when vehicle ownership
increases. Moreover, a wide range of policy-sensitive variables along with their effect magnitude was
discussed and compared with the previous studies. The results showed that one percent increase in the
probability of walking to school is expected for every 0.04 percent increase in auto travel time, 0.07
percent increase in the normalized-to-income cost of driving, 0.08 percent decrease in vehicle ownership, 
0.03 percent increase in distance to public transit, or 2.37 percent decrease in commute distance.
Safety was also found to be very in<U+FB02>uential on active commuting, such that addressing the safety concern
of parents is expected to increase propensity of active commuting to school by around 60 percent.

1. Introduction                                                                              
												
A global increase in the children obesity rate has triggered                            
policy-makers to promote a more active lifestyle among students.                                 
Many studies have shown that cardiovascular diseases along with                              
several other health issues in adulthood are rooted in a lack of                             
physical activity during childhood and adolescence (Andersen                                
et al., 2003, 2006). Since walking is the most common form of                               
physical activity for all ages (Saelens et al., 2003), transportation                        										
and urban planners struggle to <U+FB01>nd policies that promote active											
modes of transportation (AMT). This is, particularly, deemed as an											
opportunity for children to perform regular physical activity and											
diminish several diseases throughout their life (Cavill et al., 2008;                        
Tudor-Locke et al., 2002). AMT is also a prospect for city of<U+FB01>cials to                       
decrease congestion levels in the morning peak hours and thereby                             
mitigate externalities of the transportation system (Rabl and                                
												
Nazelle, 2012; Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center, 2008).
Parents, on the other hand, have understandable reservations that
have led to a signi<U+FB01>cant decline in the share of active modes.
It is essential to study the motives behind the mode choice
decisions in school trips, and implement effective policies to
promote AMT. Students' mode choice have received a growing
attention since 1994, when Towner conducted a descriptive analysis 
on students' modal selection behaviors in England and
measured exposure to injury risk in school trips (Towner et al.,
1994). Since then a wide range of factors are found to in<U+FB02>uence
students' active travel to school that includes 1) household demographic 
and socio-economic factors, 2) students' characteristics, 
3) built-environment variables, and 4) socio-economics of
the residential neighborhood. Table 1 provides a summary of explanatory 
variables, alternative modes of school travel, and data
analysis methods that are applied in some previous studies. According 
to this table, very few studies (Larsen et al., 2009;
McDonald and Aalborg, 2009; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008)
had a complete coverage on the alternative modes, while the rest
focused on a subset of alternatives. Moreover, an overview of the
explanatory variables reveals that commute distance to school,

students' gender, age, and vehicle ownership have been widely
used, while other important variables such as travel time, cost,
comfort, and speci<U+FB01>cations of the transit system have received a
limited attention. There are comprehensive reviews (Panter et al.,
2008; Pont et al., 2009; Ding et al., 2011; Wong et al., 2011) of the
past studies that compared in<U+FB02>uential factors of active school
travel. Furthermore, a review of the analysis method shows that
descriptive analysis and binary logit models are predominantly
used to explain school travel modes, while very few studies have
implemented multinomial logit (MNL) models to explain this behavior. 
We found very occasional attempts (Ewing et al., 2004)
that tried to develop more advanced econometric models (e.g. a
nested logit speci<U+FB01>cation), but the outputs was unsuccessful in
practice.

The current literature has certain gaps that have motivated this
research. First, many previous studies (Mitra et al., 2010; McMillan,
2007) distinguishes between only two alternatives with binary
choice models. Although this approach simpli<U+FB01>es the modeling
methodology, the results provide a vivid picture of school travel
modal split that limits applicability of the <U+FB01>ndings. Second, a few
studies (Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald, 2008a) that distinguishes
between multiple travel modes, have potential model misspeci<U+FB01>cation 
issues. This is because IIA (independence of irrelevant
alternatives) property of MNL is not intuitively acceptable in
school mode choice decisions, unless a very wide range of explanatory 
variables reduces the effect of correlated unobserved
factors. IIA property implies that characteristics of a third alternative 
(say school busing) do not change the relative odds between 
the two alternatives (say walking and driving). This is an
inappropriate assumption, since IIA of the MNL model indicates
that likelihood of taking a school bus and having the kid walk
alone would increase proportionally, if the parents cannot drive
their kids to school. This is, intuitively, not true, as parents who
take a school bus and those who ride their kids to school could
have similar safety reservations and therefore, taking a school bus
seems more probable when they cannot drive the kids to school.
Lastly, parents have reservations about their kids’ travel method,
including safety, comfort, and reliability, that are expected to in<U+FB02>uence 
students’ mode choice decisions. These variables have received 
very limited attention in previous models that leads to a
form of missing variable model misspeci<U+FB01>cation.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, the modeling 
methodology is brie<U+FB02>y reviewed, followed by a description of
the empirical data that is collected for this purpose. The estimation
results of a three level nested logit (NL) model is, then, presented
and analyzed from a policy perspective. Finally, the paper concludes 
with a summary and recommendations for future research.

2. Method

A multinomial logit model has a closed form formula and a
straightforward estimation method. However, assumption of IID
(independently and identically distributed) extreme value error
terms induces certain limitations that are discussed in details by
Train (2009). IIA property of MNL is the primary consequence of
IID assumption, which is intuitively unacceptable in many cases;
unless all the unobserved factors that make the error terms dependent, 
explicitly enter the model (Train, 2009). The NL model
speci<U+FB01>cation, an extension of MNL, was introduced by Ben-Akiva
and Lerman (1985) to capture correlation among alternatives to
some extents. Although IIA is maintained within each nest, it is
relaxed to IIN (independence of irrelevant nests) for alternatives in
different nests. This allows variance of errors to differ across the
nests, and yet the choice probabilities have a closed-form formula.

The utility that student j perceives from travel mode i is the
sum of a systematic utility (Vji) and an error term. The probability
of choosing each mode is given by Eq. (1) (Coldren and Koppelman, 2005), 
assuming a linear-in-parameter function of explanatory 
variables for the systematic utility and maximizing the
likelihood of occurrence for the sampled observations. In this
equation, subscript n is omitted for ease of representation, Pm is
the probability of choosing an upper-level nest (limb), Pn|m is the
conditional probability of choosing a lower-level nest (branch)
given a limb, Pi|n and is the conditional probability of choosing
an alternative given a branch. µ is the inverse logsum parameter,
also known as the coef<U+FB01>cient of inclusive value (IV). tn and
tm are, respectively, given by tn = ln( <U+2211>i`<U+2208> N exp(µn Vi`)) and

NL models may be estimated either sequentially or simultaneously. 
The <U+FB01>rst estimation method is termed limited information 
aximum likelihood (LIML), and the latter is known as full
information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation. Although
FIML estimation is more challenging and one may encounter
convergence problems, Hensher (1986) showed that LIML provides
statistically inef<U+FB01>cient estimates for a NL model. Therefore, a FIML
estimation method is adopted to obtain consistent, asymptotically
normal, and ef<U+FB01>cient estimates.

3. Data

To study school trip mode choice decisions, three folds of data
were obtained: students’ travel information, household demographics, 
and transportation and built-environment characteristics. 
The data was obtained for Tehran, with an area of 700 km2, a
population of 7.5 million, and 620 traf<U+FB01>c analysis zones. Around 15
million daily trips are made in Tehran, 27 percent of which are
educational (Municipality of Tehran, 2006). There were 5352
schools and 1,119,571 registered k-12 students in Tehran in 2010
(Statistics of Minister of Education, 2012). Public schools have a
dominant share and are mainly funded by the government.
Therefore, the administrations are relatively more under the in<U+FB02>uence 
of the government. Private schools, on the other hand,
have a higher academic quality and very costly in some cases.
Public schools, as opposed to private schools, are “zoned schools”
meaning that only those who live in a designated area could be
registered. We observed a range of 60 m to just about 10 km for
the commute distance to school in Tehran.
A paper-based survey was conducted in May 2011, targeting
4900 middle-school and high-school students throughout Tehran.
Primary school students were not covered, as the literature (Panter
et al., 2008; McMillan, 2005) suggests a relatively different mode
choice decision making process for them. A strati<U+FB01>ed random
sample was taken based on gender and level of education, since
schools are gender-segregated in Iran. Further, parents were asked
to <U+FB01>ll out the questionnaires, because they have more precise information 
about household demographics and in<U+FB02>uence on students’ 
choice of travel mode (McMillan, 2005). The survey had a
response rate of 72 percent, and collected information on <U+FB01>ve
folds: 1) household socio demographics (e.g. household size, income, 
education, vehicle ownership, working status of parents), 2)
student characteristics (e.g. age, gender, grade), 3) built-environment 
attributes (e.g. walk time to school, access to public transit,
commuting to or from a restricted traf<U+FB01>c zone), 4) school trip

behaviors (e.g. escort pattern, primary mode of travel, travel cost,
and trip chain), and 5) parental reservations about school trips
(e.g. safety, reliability, duration, and comfort).
Four modes of travel are considered in this study: walk, auto
drive, school bus, and public transportation. Travel time and cost
of auto and transit is essential for a mode choice study and was
obtained from Tehran Comprehensive Transportation and Traf<U+FB01>c
Studies Company (TCTTS) (2012). TCTTS estimated travel cost and
time from an EMME2 model that was recalibrated in 2010. Travel
time of the walking mode, on the other hand, was asked in the
survey and double checked with the commute distance. Bike mode
was not considered, since less than 1 percent of students reported
to use bicycles for school trips. Share of each mode, classi<U+FB01>ed by
gender, school level, and commute distance is illustrated in Fig. 1.
This <U+FB01>gure also illustrates the relationship between parental concerns 
and share of active modes among genders. Fig. 1(a) shows
that girls are more inclined, in general, toward walking to school.
However, as per Fig. 1(b), commute distance is negatively

correlated with walking. Further, Fig. 1(c) and (d), respectively,
shows the share of active travel modes for girls and boys. A descriptive 
analysis of parental reservations reveals that 85 percent
of parents whose kids avoid active modes of travel are primarily
concerned travel safety.

4. Model

A three level NL model was developed in this study to explain
choice of school travel mode among walk, automobile, school bus,
and public transportation. Explanatory variables that are used to
model the choice situation are de<U+FB01>ned in Table 2 and estimation
results for MNL and NL models are reported in Table 3. The tree of
the NL model is structured in a way that the upper level has two
limbs that cleave into active and non-active limbs and the lower
level of the non-active limb divides into public and private branches 
(Fig. 2). The active limb and public branch have one

alternative in their lower levels, and thus, the IV parameters are                         
<U+FB01>xed to one. The remaining IV parameters, however, are estimated.
IV parameters have to meet certain conditions in order for a                                   
nested logit model to be consistent with the global utility maximization 
theory. In a two level NL, the IV parameters should be                           												
positive and less than one, while in a three level NL, the IV parameter 
of a lower nest has to be less than that of the upper nest, as												
well. The IV parameters of the non-active limb and the private												
branch are, respectively, 0.79 and 0.74, and both are statistically                        
positive and less than one, according to a Wald test. This implies                         
that the MNL logit has misspeci<U+FB01>cation issue and, therefore, NL                            
estimates should be employed for policy assessment. School bus is                          
classi<U+FB01>ed under the private branch, given the characteristics of                           
school bus system in Tehran. School administrations, usually, sign                         
an agreement with private taxi service agencies to employ registered 
drivers for this purpose. Parents pay the entire cost, directly                          
to the taxi company. Recently, the municipality required a short                           											
trainng course for school taxi drivers in Tehran. This travel mode												
is considered private, because a taxi or van drops off 4 to 10 students 
to school.										
Student's t-test is conducted to show a statistically signi<U+FB01>cant											
effect of each explanatory variable in Table 3. All the variables are                      
of the right sign and signi<U+FB01>cant at a 99 percent con<U+FB01>dence interval                        
in both MNL and NL models, except for school bus travel time                               
(SBUS_TIME), income (INCOME), and population density (POP-DENS). 
Although the latter two variables are signi<U+FB01>cant at 99                              
percent con<U+FB01>dence interval in the NL model, they have a 95 percent 
con<U+FB01>dence interval in the MNL model. Likelihood ratio test is                         
also conducted to measure the overall goodness of <U+FB01>t of the                                
models. The NL model has a McFadden pseudo-rho-squared                                     												
(likelihood ratio index) of 38 percent which is slightly higher than										
32 percent likelihood ratio index of the MNL model. The NL model											
has a better explanatory power and the signi<U+FB01>cant IV parameters											
convey a misspeci<U+FB01>cation bias in the MNL model. This would results 
in incorrect interpretations of the results and eventually                               
leads to misdirecting policy assessments. Signi<U+FB01>cance of model                             
speci<U+FB01>cation is further elaborated in the next section along with                          
an in-depth analysis of the models.                                                        

5. Analysis of results

In<U+FB02>uential factors on school trip mode choice decisions are
reported in Table 3. Further, elasticities of some explanatory
variables are estimated through sample enumeration (Table 4). An
elasticity value shows the percentage of change in the choice
probability as a result of one percent increase in the explanatory
variable. Estimated elasticities are compared with the <U+FB01>ndings of
McDonald (2008a) and Ewing et al. (2004) in Table 5. One needs to
consider differences in demographics, socio-economics, culture,
built-environment, and analysis method, when comparing the
outputs. In<U+FB02>uence of age and gender of the students are discussed,
followed by some household demographics such as income, education, 
and vehicle ownership on the children tendency to walk to
school. Then, parental concerns are discussed that include safety,
comfort, reliability, and duration of trip.
We found a positive relationship between students' age and
their tendency to walk or take transit to school. On the contrary,
the use of school bus decreased with an increase in age. This could
be attributed to the fact that when children get older they seek a
more independent lifestyle (Fyhri and Randi, 2009). In fact, highschool 
students are 11 percent more likely to walk compared to
middle-schoolers. Contrary <U+FB01>ndings about the effect of student’s
gender on AMT utilization are reported in the literature. Although
some studies (McMillan et al., 2006) found a higher propensity for
boys to use AMT, others (Panter et al., 2010) found the opposite.
Dissimilarities in culture, demographics, built-environmental
factors, and analysis methods are possible reasons for these contradictory 
<U+FB01>ndings. A study (Leslie et al., 2010) in Australia, for
instance, targeted 2961 10 to 14 years old students and argued that
gender of the kids affect their tendency to walk and bike. Although
they found girls to be more willing to walk (44.3 percent versus
37.4 percent), boys were more likely to bike to school (22.4 percent
versus 8.3 percent). We also found boys more reluctant to walk.
This could be due to some female students’ willingness to take
after school time as an opportunity to socialize with friends and be
less constrained for a short while (Samimi and Ermagun, 2012a).
Income, car ownership, and parental education are also recognized 
in school trip AMT utilization. A negative relationship
that income and vehicle ownership have with AMT propensity is
widely recognized (McMillan, 2007; McMillan et al., 2006,

McDonald, 2008b), although the effect magnitudes are different.
Moreover, a dummy variable (NON_AUTO) for households with no
private car indicates students from such families are, understandably, 
more likely to walk or take transit to school. Table 4
indicates that one percent increase in the family income reduces
likelihood of public transit use by 0.46 percent, and increase
chance of driving, walking, and riding on school bus, respectively,
by 0.06, 0.03, and 0.06 percent. In accordance with Martin et al.
(2007), however, a negative association between parental education 
level and tendency to use AMT and public transportation was
found. This could be attributed either to the positive correlation
between income and education, or to the fact that educated parents 
are more aware of potential risks that exist in walking and
taking transit.
Safety, comfort, reliability, and duration of the school trip,
along with the school or home being located in a limited traf<U+FB01>c
zone were found to in<U+FB02>uence students’ modal decisions. The <U+FB01>rst
two factors had been explored in previous studies (McDonald and
Aalborg, 2009; McMillan, 2007), while the rest have received very
little (Samimi and Ermagun, 2012b; Ermagun et al., 2014), if any,
attention. According to Table 3, parents who are concerned about
their children’s safety are more reluctant to have their kids walk or
take transit. Further, parents who are primarily worried about the

comfort of their kids are more willing to use the school bus or
personal vehicle. School bus is more appealing to those who seek a
reliable mode, and traf<U+FB01>c restrictions incline students toward
public transportation, walking, and school bus. As expected, parents 
who are concerned about the duration of their kid's travel are
more willing to use a personal car.

6. Policy implementation

There are some policy sensitive variables in the model that
allows the city of<U+FB01>cials to understand possible ways of promoting
active school trips. These variables that include travel time, cost,
vehicle ownership, access to public transit, commute distance to
school, and students' safety are discussed in the following.
Auto travel time has a direct elasticity of  0.27, according to
Table 4. This indicates one percent increase in auto travel time
discourages parents from driving their kids to school by a probability 
of 0.27 percent. Further, this would result in a marginal
increase in the share of other modes. Probability of walking, riding
a school bus, and public transit, respectively, increases by 0.04, 0.1,
and 0.06 percent. A higher sensitivity of automobile mode to the
travel time that is arguably relative to congestion level is
								
understandable, as many parents (10 percent) drive their kids to                           
school on their way to work. Travel time of the school bus, on the                         
other hand, has a direct elasticity of  0.08 in the NL models, while                      
this number is about  0.03 in MNL model. This is a direct                                 
consequence of model misspeci<U+FB01>cation that leads to an underestimation 
of automobile use when school bus becomes less appealing. 
The results indicate that school bus is a likely replacement                      
for private cars, mainly due to the safety and reliability of service.                     
Therefore, it could be considered as a potential alternative for                           
parents who drive their kids to school.                                                    
Cost of travel is normalized to household income to consider a                         	
systematic taste variation among families. This makes the model                                
outputs more realistic, since low-income and high-income families                          
have different reactions to one dollar increase in their kid’s travel                      
cost. In our study, one percent increase in the normalized auto cost                       
decreases the likelihood of driving by 0.46 percent and 0.23 percent, 
respectively, for low and high income households. This distinction 
is essential for assessing policies that aim at reducing auto                     
driving through different pricing scenarios. Furthermore, a direct                         
elasticity of  0.46 for the normalized auto travel cost, and indirect                     

elasticities of 0.10, 0.19, and 0.07, respectively, for public, school
bus, and walk modes are reported in Table 4. Consequences of
model misspeci<U+FB01>cation is evident in this table, as indirect elasticities 
of public, school bus, and walk modes are all equal to 0.10 in
the MNL model. Therefore, expected share of students who walk to
school will be over-estimated; if a taxation policy on automobile
usage is assessed by a MNL model.
Vehicle ownership has a direct elasticity of 0.36 in the automobile 
mode. This arguably, indicates that acquiring a second car 
in families with one vehicle, increases propensity of automobile
use in school trips by 36 percent. As a result, the probabilities of
walking and using public transportation decrease by almost 8 and
12 percent, respectively. This estimate should only be considered
as an approximation, because partial derivatives that are used to
calculate elasticities are valid in a small vicinity of the observation
point. Expecting a growing trend in vehicle possession, city planners 
should be alerted of a potential increase in the use of private
cars and reducing the share of active transportation modes. An
interesting observation in Table 4 that underscores the consequences 
on model misspeci<U+FB01>cation is that indirect elasticities of
vehicle ownership (AUTO) is  0.13 in the MNL model, while NL
model provides different elasticities of  0.12,  0.20, and  0.08,
respectively for public, school bus, and walk modes. This misspeci<U+FB01>cation 
results in overestimating the reduction in the share
of students who walk to school, when vehicle ownership
increases.
Access to public transit is a key variable that is recommended
in many previous studies to be accounted for in school trip mode
choice studies. Distance to the nearest bus station that is located
on the way of each student to school was obtained and turned out
to have a signi<U+FB01>cant negative effect on public transit usage. Table 4
shows that one percent increase in the distance to the nearest bus
station decreases the likelihood of transit usage by 0.32 percent.
This would also increase probabilities of auto, school bus, and
walk, respectively, by 0.05, 0.05, and 0.03 percent. Again, the MNL

model predicts a similar indirect elasticity of 0.04 for all the non-transit 
modes. Therefore, a misspeci<U+FB01>cation bias slightly over
predicts share of students who walk to school instead of taking
transit, when access to the public transit system is decreased.
Commute distance to school is, arguably, the most prominent
factor that in<U+FB02>uence walking and biking to school. This parameter
has received a central attention in smart development of land-use,
and has the highest absolute value of elasticity in our model.
Previous studies (Fyhri et al., 2011; Larsen et al., 2009; Ewing et al
2004; Merom et al., 2006) have unanimously noted a negative
correlation between commute distance and use of active modes.
We also found a direct elasticity of  2.4 for walk time to school
that indicates every one percent increase in the students’ commute 
distance discourages use of active modes by a probability of
2.4 percent. Urban planners argue that “sprawl school siting” can
intensify urban challenges and make the land-use patterns inef<U+FB01>cient 
(Cole et al., 2010; Passmore, 2002). Some recent guidelines, 
on the other hand, in the United States required a minimum
of 30 acre plus one acre for every 100 high-school students
(Schlossberg et al., 2005). This type of regulation urges developers
to build schools in urban fringes, to acquire enough land and
minimize their costs. City planners, therefore, need to be aware of
the magnitude of such impacts and must have more contemplation 
on such policies that discourage active modes of commute to
school. In Iran, on the other hands, public policies encourage
neighborhood schools, although regional private schools are also
growing. Results of the model also indicated a direct elasticity of
0.15 for population density in the active mode, and an indirect
elasticity of 0.15 in the other modes. MNL and NL models,
however, predict fairly similar results for this parameter.
Safety is an important concern of parents that is in<U+FB02>uential on
reducing the use of active travel modes. Our model shows that
addressing the safety concerns of parents could increase propensity 
of active commuting to school by around 60 percent. This
increase in the probability of walking is calculated setting the
continuous variables at average and discrete variables at their
mode. Therefore, planers need to study policies that increase
parents' perception about their kids' travel safety to school. Safe
Routes to School (McDonald and Aalborg, 2009; Staunton et al.,
2003) and Walk School Bus (Collins and Kearns, 2010; Staunton
et al., 2003; Engwicht, 1992) are implemented in the United States
to address parental safety concerns and improve share of active
modes among students.

7. Conclusion

This study was an effort to develop a three level nested logit
model to explain the behavioral aspects of school trip modal selection. 
Understanding the motives behind such behaviors is essential 
for city planners to promote active commuting to school.
This is deemed an opportunity to prevent many health issues that
are stimulated by a lack of physical activity during childhood.
Further, promoting active modes for school trips is an opportunity
to decrease the morning peak congestion and thereby mitigate
externalities of the transportation system. This study introduced a
three level nested logit, a well-grounded econometric model that
deals with strong assumptions of the multinomial logit speci<U+FB01>cation. 
Although there have been some efforts and recommendations 
(Ewing et al., 2004) for applying such a model speci<U+FB01>cation,
to the best of our knowledge, this is the <U+FB01>rst model that is introduced 
to the literature of school trip mode choice. This study
looked at a wide range of explanatory variables and conducted an
in-depth analysis of the models. Particularly, we underscored the
signi<U+FB01>cance of model misspeci<U+FB01>cation in terms of policy outcomes.
For instance, elasticity analysis of the MNL model showed an

indirect elasticity of vehicle ownership of  0.13 in the MNL
model, while NL model provides different elasticities of 0.12,
 0.20, and  0.08, respectively for public, school bus, and walk
modes. This misspeci<U+FB01>cation results in overestimating the reduction 
in the share of students who walk to school when vehicle
ownership increases. A wide range of policy-sensitive variables
along with their effect magnitude was also discussed and compared 
with the previous studies. Particularly, we found that one
.,        percent increase in the probability of walking to school is expected
by every 0.04 percent increase in auto travel time, 0.07 percent
increase in the normalized-to-income cost of driving, 0.08 percent
decrease in vehicle ownership, 0.03 percent increase in distance to
public transit, or 2.37 percent decrease in commute distance.
Safety was also found to be very in<U+FB02>uential on active commuting,
such that we found addressing the safety concern of parents could
increase propensity of active commuting to school by around 60
percent. Yet, this study has the following limitations that could be
possible avenues for future research.
Trips of students who take transit to school should be partially
considered as active (Morency et al., 2011), since they need to
walk to the nearest bus station. This could be addressed by
developing a cross nested logit model, and setting the public
transit option in the active limb as well as the non-active limb.
Built-environment variables such as density of green space,
school, sidewalk and other land-use variables that are expected
to promote walking trips were not utilized, due to unavailability 
of disaggregate data.
School trips are the focus of this study, although walking could
be promoted in other trips such as shopping and recreational
trips.
A systematic taste variation for cost of travel is considered in
this study, while a mixed nested logit speci<U+FB01>cation allows for
accounting for a random taste variation. This is expected to
provide a more realistic analysis of pricing scenarios.
Evaluating latent variables to investigate travel behavior in
school trips is a useful attitude which is not included in the
current study. To consider latent variables and parental attitudes 
for each concern more information is needed which were
not included in the dataset.