School travel modes and children’s spatial cognition                                                     

Abstract
This study broadens understanding of how children’s travel modes influence the development of
their spatial cognition, specifically the development of their spatial representation of home–school
routes. Data were collected using a questionnaire survey and a cognitive mapping process at an
elementary school in northern Taiwan. The sample, which comprised 521 Grades 1–6 children
aged 7–12 years, was analysed through linear regressions. Empirical results indicate that the use
of independent, active or non-motorised transportation modes improved the children’s spatial
cognition regarding their home–school routes. This study not only provides new knowledge
about the relationships between travel modes and the spatial cognition of children, but also identifies 
policy directions in relation to school transportation and the development of spatial cognition 
in children.

Introduction                                         
						
Spatial cognition is defined as the acquisition, 
organisation, utilisation and revision of      
knowledge about the spatial properties of            
objects and events in the world (Montello,           
2001). By exploring and experiencing environments, 
children develop their spatial cognition. 
Piaget (1950) suggested that the
cognitive development of children during
Corresponding author:
their maturity process has four stages,         
namely, sensorimotor stage, pre-operational   
stage, concrete operational stage and formal 

operational stage. Piaget’s stages of cognitive
development are generally used as the basis
for depicting the growth of logical thinking
in children and such use has been widely
extended to explore issues in child psychology, 
such as the influence of advertising
(Kinsky and Bichard, 2011), and in education, 
such as teaching strategies (Powell and

Kalina, 2009). Children aged 7–11 years are
typically in the concrete operational stage.
At this stage, children begin to increase their
awareness of external environments. Their
self-absorption also declines as they begin to
understand the concept of space in the relationships 
among proximity, separation,
order, enclosure and continuity (Piaget and
Inhelder, 1956). As they age, children transfer 
their reference points to other objects or
people and start to identify their relative
positions in the given space. Recognising
place is at the core of spatial cognition.
Notably, basic spatial cognition markedly
influences performance in various fields,
such as arts, math, architecture, aviation and
design. Therefore, spatial cognition is crucial
to a child’s growth.
Research on the spatial cognition of children 
has been of interest to both geographers 
(e.g. Kitchin, 1996) and psychologists
(e.g. Joshi et al., 1999). Previous studies
identified numerous factors that influence a
child’s spatial cognition. These factors are
physical attributes, such as age (e.g.
Matthews, 1984) and gender (e.g. Ahmadi
and Taniguchi, 2007); socio-cultural context
(e.g. Parameswaran, 2003); behavioural
experiences (e.g. Schmeinck and Thurston,
2007); and household attributes (e.g. Joshi
et al., 1999). Gauvian (1993) argued that
practical everyday activities influence individual 
spatial knowledge. Travelling to
school is one of the most common daily
activities of children. Children generally
travel between their homes and schools twice
on weekdays. On their way to and from
school, children can interact with the surrounding 
environments and develop spatial
cognition of their neighbourhood by exploring 
their surroundings. Through cognitive
processes, children transform their experiences 
into spatial cognition, which represents 
their view of the world. However, only
a few researchers have examined the relationships 
between travel to school and

spatial cognition. Joshi et al. (1999) and
Rissotto and Tonucci (2002) argued that
children who travelled to school without an
adult can draw more neighbourhood landmarks 
in their cognitive maps than children
who were accompanied by an adult. Ahmadi
and Taniguchi (2007) concluded that children 
who walked or took buses on their own
to school can present more accurate sketch
maps than those who were driven by car or
took school buses. Parameswaran (2003),
who compared cognitive maps by children
from India and the USA, determined that
the use of personal vehicles is related to
reduction in the number of mapped neighbourhoods. 
The limited findings in previous
research indicate that the independent,
active or non-motorised travel modes for
home–school journeys could benefit children’s 
development of spatial cognition.
Independent travel modes, which refer to
walking, biking, or taking a school bus or
public transit without adult company, provide 
children with more opportunities to
explore surroundings along their routes.
Active travel modes, which denote independent 
modes excluding taking a school bus,
encourage children to perform way-finding
action and to pay attention to environments.
Non-motorised travel modes, which include
walking and biking, allow children to travel
at a low speed and observe their environments 
in detail. These three travel modes
theoretically benefit spatial knowledge
acquisition. Although independent and
active travel modes have been examined
individually by different surveys, empirical
evidence of how non-motorised travel modes
influence a child’s spatial cognition has not
been presented in literature.
The travel behaviours of children have
markedly changed toward the use of dependent, 
passive and motorised travel modes
over the last 40 years. In England, the proportion 
of children aged 7–8 who travelled
to school independently in 1970 was 80%.

In 1990, this proportion declined to 10%
(Hillman et al., 1990). In the USA, 48% of
children aged 5–14 usually walked or biked
to school in 1969. In 2009, only 12% of children 
walked and 1% biked to school
(Federal Highway Administration, 2011).
The statistics for Taiwanese children are
similar. Lin and Chang (2010) surveyed elementary 
school children in Taipei in 2006
and found that only 35%–40% of school
trips were independent (no adults) and more
than 40% of school trips were by private
motorised vehicles. To develop suitable policies 
for school travel that can improve a
child’s spatial cognition, the relationship
between travel modes and spatial cognition
development must be comprehensively elucidated. 
However, evidence in literature
remains too fragmented and incomprehensive 
for policy development.
The current study examines the relationships 
between transportation mode for
school travel and spatial representation
along home–school routes in children aged
7–12. The study question is associated with
the acquisition and development of spatial
cognition, which compose one of the essential 
topics in geographic studies of spatial
cognition that was argued by Montello
(2001). The study sample comprised 521 elementary 
school students in a city in northern
Taiwan; sample data were collected using a
two-stage survey (general questionnaire and
spatial cognitive mapping) in November and
December 2012. To characterise the relationships, 
this study categorised travel modes as
independent modes versus dependent modes,
active modes versus passive modes and non-motorised 
modes versus motorised modes.
This study examines spatial cognition using
cognitive maps drawn by the participants
and seven indicators that measure the richness, 
correctness and aggregation of spatial
representations on the home–school routes
of children. Compared with that of previous
research, empirical evidence in this study

contributes to literature in several ways.
First, this study determines the effects of
independent, active and non-motorised
travel modes on spatial cognition simultaneously, 
whereas Joshi et al. (1999), Rissotto
and Tonucci (2002), and Ahmadi and
Taniguchi (2007) examined the individual
effects of independent or active travel modes.
Second, this study is the first to provide evidence 
of the effects of non-motorised travel
modes on children’s spatial cognition and to
confirm the hypothesis of Parameswaran
(2003), which has been previously untested.
This original evidence supports theory development 
and will be a valuable reference for
the development of policy directions. Third,
this study investigates the comprehensive
measures of spatial cognition, which include
number of landmarks, paths, places and
objects, and correctness of route direction
and structure. These measures represent
multiple components and provide more complete 
information about a child’s spatial cognition. 
To the best of our knowledge, such
comprehensive evidence has not been put
forward by previous studies.

Method

Participants and procedure
The sample in this study was selected from
an elementary school located in a medium-sized 
city in northern Taiwan with a population 
of 413,488 at the end of 2012. The
school’s catchment area, which comprises
residential areas, borders the city centre and
covers approximately 1 km2. Convenient
transportation services are available in this
catchment area: the school is served by a
railway route, two bus routes and several
roads. The longest distance from a residence
to the school is approximately 1.2 km. Given
that the school has a history that exceeds 56
years and a good reputation, many students
living outside its catchment area travel relatively 
long distances to the school.

This study distributed a questionnaire in
November and December of 2012 to all students 
in 32 classes; the classes were randomly 
selected from the 74 classes. The
survey was reviewed and approved by the
Research Ethics Committee of the National
Taiwan University on 29 October 2012 (No.
201210HS022). Among the 906 surveyed
students, 553 students agreed to participate,
yielding 521 effective responses. The
response rate was 61.04%, and effective
response rate was 94.21%. The first part of
the survey contained questions regarding
travel to and from school (mode, distance,
time and number of stops) during the previous 
week, individual attributes (age, gender,
physical activity and travel experience), and
household attributes (parental attitudes,
education levels, income, vehicle ownership
and years of residence in the catchment
area). The surveyed students were requested
to bring home the questionnaire forms of
the first part of the survey and the informed
consent forms (ICFs). After the parents have
consented to their participation in the survey
as evidenced by the parental signatures on
the ICFs, the participants and their parents
answered the questions together at home.
The questions on household attributes were
answered by parents, and the questions on
school travel and individual attributes were
answered by the children under their parents’ 
supervision. The second part of the survey 
required participants to draw cognitive
maps of the areas along their home–school
routes in their classrooms.
Cognitive maps have been employed to
record participants’ spatial cognition by
Ahmadi and Taniguchi (2007), Joshi et al.

(1999), Matthews (1984), Mondschein et al.
(2010), Parameswaran (2003), and Rissotto
and Tonucci (2002). According to the review
by Mondschein et al. (2010: 847), a cognitive
map includes spatial information about
environments, including place and route
identity, location, distance and direction

(Downs and Stea, 1977). In the cognitive
mapping process in this study, each participant 
was given a sheet of A4 (210 mm 3
297 mm) blank paper and was requested to
draw a map of his or her route from home
to school and the areas along that route
within 15 minutes. Biel (1982) suggested that
a child’s home acts as a central reference
point in his or her mental representation of
environments. Moreover, participants were
encouraged to draw as many significant
landmarks, paths, places and objects as possible. 
Based on the definitions of elements in
mental maps by Lynch (1960), landmarks,
such as noticeable buildings or stores, are
readily identifiable objects that serve as
external reference points; paths are streets,
sidewalks, trails and other channels on
which people travel; places or districts, such
as playgrounds, are spaces that distinguish
their identity or character; and objects, such
as bus stops, traffic signs or trees, are significant 
elements that differ from landmarks,
paths and places. These definitions were
explained by the investigators before the
participants started to draw their cognitive
maps. After the mapping process, the completed 
maps were checked by the investigators 
immediately and the participants were
requested to interpret their maps if these
were unclear. If a participant drew multiple
nodal elements that were neither path nor
place and were not clear enough to be identified 
as landmarks in his or her map, then the
investigators requested this participant to
interpret which elements were landmarks
and which elements were objects.

Study variables

Figure 1 lists the study variables including
outcome variables (spatial cognition) and
explanatory variables (school travel modes
and controls). Considering that multiple
representations make up a cognitive map
(Kuipers, 1978), the following seven


indicators on the cognitive maps served as
the outcome variables representing a child’s
spatial cognition:
Landmark: The number of landmarks on a
cognitive map
Path: The number of paths on a cognitive
map
Place: The number of places on a cognitive
map
Object: The number of objects on a cognitive
map
Route orientation: The orientation correctness
of a route from a child’s home to his or her
school drawn in a cognitive map
Route structure: The structural correctness of
a travel route from a child’s home to his or
her school in a cognitive map
Aggregation: The summation of the above six
variables, representing general performance
considering richness (first four variables) and
correctness (fifth and sixth variables) for a
cognitive map

Route orientation is measured based on the
definition of route orientation by Rissotto
and Tonucci (2002: 70) and has a value
between 6 (maximum) and 3 (minimum).
The locations of home and school as indicated 
by a child were compared with their
true positions according to their top/bottom
and right/left laterality. A classification,
erroneous = 1 / correct = 2, was used to
code both types of laterality. Additional
information concerning orientation was
obtained from the comparison between the
route drawn by a child and the real route,
obtained by reversal/rotation. This attribute
was also coded using a classification

presence of rotation/reversal = 1, absence
of rotation/reversal = 2. Route structure is a
variable that is based on the definition of
route structure by Rissotto and Tonucci
(2002: 70) and has a value between 4 (maximum) 
and 2 (minimum). The route drawn
by a child was compared with the real route
in terms of proportionality among the different 
segments and the number of corners.
Each of these attributes was coded using a
classification erroneous = 1 / correct = 2.
Figure 2(a) illustrates a cognitive map
drawn by a boy aged 9 in a third-grade class.
The boy went to school daily by riding a
motorcycle with his mother and left school
by taking the school bus that was operated
by a school-age child care centre. Figure 2(b)
shows the real positions of the elements in
the cognitive map. According to these two
maps, the outcome variables of this observation 
were coded as landmark = 2, path = 2,
place = 0, object = 0, route orientation = 5
(top/down and left/right literalities were both
correct but presented rotation) and route
structure = 3 (number of corners was correct
but its proportionality among segments was
erroneous). The two landmarks were a convenience 
store and a book store with brightly
coloured appearances and were used as reference 
points in relation to the school.
This study applied linear regressions to
identify the relationships between outcome
variables and explanatory variables. Table 1
lists the definitions of explanatory variables
and their hypothetical relationships with
children’s spatial cognition. The justifications 
of these hypotheses are as follows.

School travel modes. Three travel mode                           
attributes should be positively related to                       
children’s spatial cognition. The first                          
attribute is independence. When children                         
travel between home and school without                           
adults, they have more opportunities to                          
explore their surroundings along their route                     
than children who travel with adults. We                         
hypothesise that children’s spatial                              
recognition improves with the increase in the                    
use of independent travel modes. Joshi et al.                    
(1999) and Rissotto and Tonucci (2002)                           
concluded that children who travel to school                     
independently can perform better in terms of                     
spatially representing landmarks than                            
children who travel to school with parents.                      
In addition to landmarks, other spatial                          
cognition items, such as paths, places,                          
objects and routes have not been examined                        
in previous research. The second attribute is                    
way-finding action. Independent children are                     
motivated to actively recognise the ways to                      
home or school; thus, they typically pay                         
more attention to their environments and                         

remember more spatial information than
children who are escorted by parents or
school bus drivers. Therefore,
hypothesise that increasing the use of active
travel modes enhances children’s spatial
recognition. Taking a school bus is not an
active travel mode because children are not
required to pay attention to the route or
stops when on a school bus. Ahmadi and
Taniguchi (2007) showed that children who
walked or took public buses to school on
their own generated better sketch maps in
terms of correctness of travel routes than
those who were driven by cars or took
school buses. The third attribute is speed.
When children travel at a low speed, they
have more time to observe. Thus, the
likelihood of observing environments in
detail is higher compared with children who
use rapid travel modes. Thus, we hypothesise
that increasing the use of non-motorised
travel modes enhances the children’s spatial
cognition. Parameswaran (2003), who
examined the differences in cognitive maps

drawn by Indian children and US children,
hypothesised that the use of motorised
vehicles was negatively related to children’s
spatial knowledge of their immediate
neighbourhood. However, this hypothesis
was never empirically tested.

Controls. Physical, behavioural, household
and trip attributes, in addition to school
travel modes, are related to spatial cognition
and are used as control variables. In terms of
physical attributes, previous studies differ in
their observations of the relationships
between gender and spatial cognition.
Herman et al. (1987), Mondschein et al.
(2010) and Schmeinck and Thurston (2007)
concluded that males can perform better than
females; Ahmadi and Taniguchi (2007) and
Go´mez et al. (2011) found that females can
perform better than males; and Kitchin (1996)
and Sandamas and Foreman (2007) argued
that no significant difference exists between
the spatial cognition of males and females.
Hence, we could not confidently hypothesise
the relationship between gender and spatial
cognition prior to the drawing task. Based on
four-stage theory of Piaget (1950) and the
large amount of empirical evidence including
that in the work of Ahmadi and Taniguchi
(2007), Herman et al. (1987), Matthews
(1984), Parameswaran (2003), Poria et al.
(2005) and Thommen et al. (2010), children’s
spatial cognition evolves as they age. Thus,
we hypothesise that grades and spatial cognition 
are positively related. Given that overweight 
children often take part in outdoor
activities and interactions with environments
less often than healthy weight students, they
may develop their spatial cognition slower
than the other children. Go´mez et al. (2011)
found that body mass index (BMI) negatively
affects the children’s spatial cognition. We
also hypothesise this finding.
For behavioural attributes, increasing the
frequency or opportunity to engage in

outdoor activities may improve the ability of
children to observe and their interest in the
neighbourhood         environments,     thereby
enhancing their spatial cognition. Previous
research suggested that travel experiences
(Schmeinck and Thurston, 2007), freedom
to engage in outdoor activities (Joshi et al.,
1999; Torell and Biel, 1985), and frequency
of physical activities (Go´mez et al., 2011) are
positively associated with the children’s spatial 
cognition. Accordingly, these relationships 
are also hypothesised in this study.
In terms of household attributes, as the
number of years that a child resides in the
same neighbourhood increases, his or her
familiarity with the neighbourhood improves,
enhancing spatial cognition of his or her surroundings.
Previous studies support this
hypothesis. For example, Mondschein et al.
(2010) found that as the number of years a
person resides at the same address increases,
his or her accuracy in geographical distance
estimation increases. Parents with high socioeconomic 
status (SES) could pay more attention 
to their child’s development in numerous
aspects, including spatial cognition. Previous
research mostly used parental education level
and household income as determinants of
parental SES and concluded that positive
relationships exist between parental SES and
a child’s health (e.g. Flores et al., 1999) and
academic achievement (e.g. Davis-Kean,
2005). We hypothesise that the same relationships 
exist for the study sample. Household
vehicle ownership should affect the travel
mode a child uses in his or her daily life.
Parents who own motorcycles or cars may
often transport their child using a motorised
vehicle, thereby reducing their child’s opportunities 
to observe his or her surroundings
and to develop spatial cognition. Conversely,
children of households that own bikes tend
to frequently use bikes, thus increasing their
opportunities to explore their environments
and improve their spatial cognition.

For the trip attributes of home–school
travel, travel distance and number of stops
are two attributes that are related to spatial
cognition. A stop denotes a pass-by stop
along a school–home journey after school
for specific purposes, such as shopping, visiting 
friends and learning activities that are
not offered by transportation (e.g. traffic
light or bus station) or active pauses during
travels. Short period stops caused by transportation 
or active pauses are quite difficult
to remember and record completely by children 
and thus were not counted in this study.
Ahmadi and Taniguchi (2007) investigated
children’s stops for specific purposes and
argued that as the number of stops during
school travel increases, opportunities to
interact with environments increases as well,
benefiting the children’s spatial cognition.
Conversely, when travel distance is long,
parents typically escort their children to or
from schools via motorised vehicles, negatively 
affecting the children’s spatial cognition. 
However, the effects of travel distance
on spatial cognition appear to depend on
travel mode. That is, walking or biking long
distances should increase the number of
opportunities to interact with environments,
benefiting the children’s spatial cognition
(Go´mez et al., 2011). Therefore, we hypothesise 
that children’s spatial cognition is positively 
related to the number of stops and
negatively related to travel distance when
using motorised travel modes.

Results

Table 2 summarises the descriptive statistics
for the study variables. According to the
variation coefficients, most continuous variables 
have adequate variations for regression
analysis. Relatively small variations exist in
values for route orientation and BMI. In
addition, highly diverse values exist for the
variable number of stops. Among the participants, 
55%, 31% and 49% used

independent, active and non-motorised
modes, respectively, for school travels at
least once during the survey week. More
than half of the participants did not use
active or non-motorised modes for school
travels during the survey period; hence, median 
values of zero were obtained for these
two travel mode variables. The distribution
of males and females in this study was
approximately equal, and almost all had
experience of travelling long distances. Most
parents graduated from high school or
earned bachelor’s degrees. In terms of
income, 70% of surveyed households were
below the median (NT$786,324 or
US$26,210 annually). Furthermore, 80% of
the households owned one or more cars,
motorcycles or bikes.
The SPSS 17.0 package and ordinary
least squares method were employed for
model estimation. For each outcome variable, 
the base model only considered the
control variables and the expanded models
considered the control and travel mode variables. 
Three travel mode variables, namely,
independent mode, active mode and non-motorised 
mode, were used separately in
three expanded models to prevent co-variation. 
The co-variation exists among these
travel mode variables because each observation 
could be associated with more than one
travel mode variables. For example, children
who walk to schools without adult company
are associated with using independent mode,
active mode and non-motorised mode simultaneously. 
Explanatory variables with a
coefficient significance below the confidence
level of 12a = 80% were withdrawn from
regressions. Confidence levels of 99%, 90%
and 80% for each variable in regression
results represented strong, moderate and
weak significance, respectively.
The Appendix lists the estimation results
for the seven outcome variables. The regression 
models showed mostly acceptable
goodness-of-fit with R2 values exceeding 0.3.


Although the models for place and route                   
direction had relatively low R2 values                    
(approximately 0.1 and 0.2, respectively),                
their F tests yielded strong significance.                
Furthermore, all variance inflation factor                

values were less than 10. In other words, no
significant multicollinearity existed among
explanatory variables. Therefore, this study
confirmed that these regressions are effective
means for examining the relationships

between explanatory variables and spatial
cognition.
Among the regressions of the seven outcomes, 
the goodness-of-fit of the expanded
models was insignificantly better than that
of the base models; however, the travel mode
variables added to the expanded models significantly 
explained the partial outcomes.
Table 3 lists the travel mode variables that
achieved moderate significances (a = 0.1) in
the Appendix and their effects on children’s
spatial cognition. Use of independent, active
or non-motorised modes during school
travel in general was positively related to the
number of objects, correctness of route
orientation and structure, and aggregated
scores for the spatial cognition maps of the
participants. The empirically positive effects
(Table 3) support the hypothesised effects
(Table 1), whereas the negative relationship
between non-motorised mode and correctess 
of route structure contradicts the
hypothesised relationship. Furthermore,
school travel modes were not associated with
the number of landmarks, paths and places
in the participants’ cognitive maps (Table 3).
The possible reasons for these contrasting or
insignificant results of the hypothesised
effects are discussed in the following section.
As for control variables, most of the
empirical effects (Appendix) were consistent
with the expected effects (Table 1). These
relationships include the positive effects of

the study variables, namely: male; grade;
long-distance travel; no worries about outdoor 
activities (park, store1 and store2);
physical activity; and household income as
well as the negative effects of car ownership
and travel distance using motorised mode on
participants’ spatial cognition. Certain controls, 
including BMI, leisure travel and years
of residence in the same neighbourhood
failed to significantly explain any of the outcomes. 
The negative effects of variables,
such as no worries about outdoor activities
(street), motorcycle ownership, bike ownership 
and number of stops on partial outcomes 
were contrary to the hypothesised
effects (Appendix). Furthermore, some controls 
showed varying effects on different outcomes. 
The freedom during off-school time
was negatively related to the number of
objects but positively associated with the
correctness of the route direction and structure. 
The father’s education level was positively 
related to the correctness of route
direction and structure and did not present a
clear relationship with other outcomes. In
addition, the mother’s education level was
negatively associated with the aggregation
outcome and did not present a clear relationship 
with other outcomes. As the hypothetical 
effects were proposed based on findings
from American (North and South), Asian
(Middle East and South), and European
studies, they could not fully explain spatial

cognition of children in the Taiwanese context. 
Therefore, the inconsistent results
require further exploration.

Discussion

Empirical evidence confirmed that school–
home travel modes affect a child’s spatial
cognition. Specifically, using independent,
active or non-motorised modes is positively
associated with spatial cognition in terms of
object richness and route correctness. These
analytical results support the idea proposed
by Hillman et al. (1990) that travelling to
school by a motorised mode and with an
adult negatively affects children’s spatial
cognition development.
The research results show that using independent 
or active travel modes is positively
correlated with object richness, correctness
of route orientation and structure, and
aggregated score in a child’s cognitive map.
These relationships have not been identified
in previous research. However, Joshi et al.
(1999), Rissotto and Tonucci (2002) and
Ahmadi and Taniguchi (2007) concluded
that using independent or active travel
modes enables children to draw several landmarks 
or places in cognitive maps. However,
these effects were not identified in the present 
research. The above inconsistency may
be related to the differences in the study
designs. The first difference is in the survey
instruments. Previous studies fixed and
marked school positions and spatial boundaries 
with survey instruments and asked participants 
to draw cognitive maps within
these restricted boundaries. These instruments 
stopped the children from drawing
items beyond the given boundaries,
adversely affecting the completeness of the
cognitive maps. The present study used
blank paper and asked participants to mark
the positions of their school, home and all
other items on their cognitive maps. In the
absence of any spatial boundary, children

were able to draw more comprehensive cognitive 
maps. The second difference is in
terms of the measures for travel mode variables. 
This study measured travel mode variables 
by the frequency of travel to and from
the school using different modes within a
single week. However, previous research
used dummy variables to code the most frequent 
mode used for school travel and
ignored the possibility of using different
travel modes day by day and between travels
to and from schools. With its thoughtful
design, the empirical evidence gathered in
this study should be more reliable than those
in previous research.
For non-motorised travel modes, the
research results indicate that walking or biking 
to and from schools is positively related
to the correctness of route orientation and
aggregated scores of cognitive maps. This
positive relationship confirms the hypothesis
put forward by Parameswaran (2003), which
has never been examined empirically.
Notably, non-motorised modes are negatively 
correlated with the correctness of
route structure. This finding is not consistent
with the hypothesis in this study. Two possible 
reasons exist for this test result. First, a
significant proportion of the children who
lived in neighbouring areas were driven to
or from the school and these children were
very familiar with the routes between their
homes and the school because the distances
were short. Among the surveyed children living 
within 1000 m of the school, 42.6% were
routinely transported to or from the school
by motorcycle or car. In such cases, using
non-motorised travel modes did not account
for the negative relationship. Second, walking 
or biking benefits route direction cognition 
but could adversely affect route
structure cognition. Based on the definition
of Rissotto and Tonucci (2002), route structure 
is related to the spatial scale relations
among itinerary segments and turns on a
home–school route. According to numerous

Fang and Lin
studies, including those by Crompton and
Brown (2006), Durgin et al. (2005) and
Hanyu and Itsukushima (1995), movement
speed is an influential factor for distance
cognition. Walking or biking at a low speed,
when compared with riding a motorised
vehicle, could result in biased distance estimations 
which in turn negatively affect a
child’s cognition of route structure. Among
the 34 observations on children whose travel
distances between residence and school were
roughly equivalent (600 m–1000 m), the
average route structure score of children
using non-motorised modes more than five
times during the study week was relatively
lower than that of children using motorised
modes more than five times during the study
week (2.5 \ 2.7). This result denotes that
fast travellers could represent better route
structure than slow travellers and speed
could influence the cognition of the route
structure. However, the negative relationship 
between non-motorised travel modes
and the cognition of route structure warrants
further study.
In addition to travel modes, several controls
that are related to travel activity present 
meaningful associations with children’s
spatial cognition. Experiences of leisure
travel and long-distance travel are positively
related to the representation of the landmarks, 
places and objects in a child’s cognitive map. 
This result supports the argument
of Schmeinck and Thurston (2007) that
increasing travel experiences improves children’s 
abilities to observe and develops their
interest in their neighbourhood environments. 
Moreover, the interactive variable of
travel distance using motorised modes is
negatively related to the representation of
the places and the correctness of the route
direction and structure in a child’s cognitive
map. This finding supports the view of

Go´mez et al. (2011) that increasing walking
or biking distances increases the opportunities 
to interact with environments and
1591
benefits children’s spatial cognition. The
above evidence denotes that school travel
modes and other travel experiences, such as
frequency and distance, are important to
children’s spatial cognition.
These discussions emphasise that the
empirical findings contribute to literature in
two significant ways. First, this study examined 
the comprehensive measures of travel
modes (i.e. independent, active and non-motorised 
travel modes) and spatial cognition 
(i.e. richness of landmarks, paths, places
and objects, and correctness of route direction 
and structure). To the best of our
knowledge, such comprehensive evidence
does not exist in previous child cognition
studies. Second, this study analysed the
unique conditions of a Taiwanese city,
including motorcycle ownership and parental 
attitudes. Moreover, the study results are
a valuable reference for developing policy
directions in relation to school transportation 
and the development of spatial cognition 
of children. Improving spatial cognition
is important to the general population
because spatial cognition plays a major role
in one’s daily tasks and specialised tasks,
which include way-finding as part of navigation, 
acquiring and using spatial knowledge
from direct experience, using spatially iconic
symbolic representations, using spatial language, 
imaging places and reasoning with
mental models and location allocation
(Montello and Raubal, 2013). To encourage
parents to allow their children to travel to or
from schools using active or non-motorised
travel modes without an adult for spatial
cognition development, city managers
should develop safe and child-friendly transportation 
systems and built environments
within the school catchment areas.

Limitations

To further clarify the relationships between
travel modes and children’s spatial

cognition, future studies should closely
examine three issues, which reflect the limitations 
of this study. The first issue is
related to the study population. This study
enrolled children from a single elementary
school. Although a school may be located in
an urban area with similar socioeconomic
circumstances, variations probably exist for
different contexts, which could include elementary 
schools versus high schools and
general Chinese society versus aboriginal
society. To generate comprehensive information 
about the relationships between travel
mode and spatial cognition, future research
should investigate populations with different
socioeconomic contexts and ages.
The second issue is connected with the
survey method. This study obtained the
travel mode uses and school trip attributes
via a self-reported questionnaire survey.
Such a survey method could result in measurement 
errors. Revealed surveys, which
objectively record real behaviours, are normally 
more reliable than stated surveys in
recording travel behaviours; however, the
significant costs of monitoring equipment
and the inconvenience of sample observations 
generally make this method unsuitable
for recording travel behaviours over an
entire week. When monitoring equipment
such as a global positioning system is available 
and sample children cooperate during a
survey period, recording travel behaviours is
preferable over the self-reported survey.
The third issue is associated with the performance 
measures for spatial cognitive
maps. Very few studies have developed measurements 
that can quantitatively evaluate
spatial cognitive maps. The definitions for
outcome variables in this study followed

those that were used in a limited number of
studies. These definitions directly aggregated
different cognition items and correct orientation 
or structure of routes in a cognitive
map. However, these direct measurements
do not deal with differences in spatial sizes

among cognitive maps or do not consider
the different levels of importance of items on
a map. To prevent measurement errors, reliable 
and unbiased measurements for spatial
cognitive maps must be developed.