Travel to school and housing markets: a case study of
Sheffield, England
AbstractHow children travel to school is at the centre of a complex set of interrelated
issues with significant policy implications. This paper reviews the relation of patterns of
travel to school to concerns about public health, school choice, urban form, and residential
housing markets. The spatial relations between pupils’ homes and the schools that they
attend provides the basis of an analytical framework that links local neighbourhood
characteristics, school performance, and house prices to the distance and mode of travel
to school and the level of ‘excess commuting’ in the urban system. A unique analysis of
several integrated micro-datasets from Sheffield, UK, suggests that, while there are high
levels of excess commuting, there remains a complex interrelationship between housing
and neighbourhood characteristics, school performance, and commuting patterns. There
are differences between the pictures for primary schools and secondary schools. Policies
aimed at promoting transport efficiency and those promoting school choice are likely to
remain in tension.
Introduction
The journeys that children make to school have come to symbolise and exemplify some of
the fundamental tensions that exist in urban societies. The ‘journey to learn’ today exists
at the intersection of a range of contemporary public policy debates, including those related
to public health; urban transportation; choice within education markets and other public
services; and the structure and behaviour of residential property markets. While trips to school
have achieved status as something of a cause célèbre among those concerned with the role
that increasing levels of car dependence plays in explaining and reproducing public health
epidemics, especially childhood obesity (see, inter alia, Davison et al, 2008; Panter et al,
2010a; 2010b; Schlossberg et al, 2006), this concern with public health, though justified,
belies the complexity of the wider geographical and policy issues at play. How children
travel to school is also at the heart of broader concerns about the decentralising tendencies
of urban structure and land use in contemporary capitalist societies (Cervero, 1996; Halcrow
Group Ltd et al, 2009; Weitz, 2003), associated trends in ‘suburbanised’, auto-dependent
urban forms (Larsen et al, 2009; McMillan, 2006; Schlossberg et al, 2006), and the limits of
choice in the delivery of key public services within fragmented social and geographic space
(Ball, 1993; Reay and Lucey, 2003; West, 2006).
     The purpose of this paper to explore some of these interconnected issues through the
lens of children’s travel to school. The methods include a unique GIS analysis of microdata
on school commuting and the neighbourhood geography of an English city. The paper is
motivated by a concern that the spatial and economic inefficiencies suggested by school
commuting patterns ought to be an important factor within debates about choice within local
education markets (Wilson et al, 2007). Donegan et al (2007) and Newman and Kenworthy
(2000), for example, point to the sustainability implications of transport choices and
infrastructure that result from the many thousands of daily decisions made as part of the
journey to school. The uneven geography of urban housing markets bears some resemblance
to educational inequalities, such that house prices may serve to lock in and exacerbate
patterns of sociospatial segregation (Cheshire and Sheppard, 2004; Gibbons and Machin,
2003; Leech and Campos, 2001).
    It is possible to theorise the interconnections between these processes in two mutually
reinforcing ways. First, the factors implicated in the education choice equation exemplify
a fundamental dialectic between the liberalisation of access to public services and the
reduction of social inequalities. Both the access and inequalities dimensions of this
dialectic comprise an ambiguous relation. On the one hand, increasing access to educational
opportunities irrespective of home location may be important in breaking down social
barriers and promoting patterns of social mobility. Yet, on the other hand, this might come
with increased carbon emissions and congestion, both being potential results of the increased
levels of ‘excess commuting’ (Horner, 2002; Ma and Banister, 2007) implied by greater
school choice. The impacts of these economic and environmental costs may be unequal
across space. Variations in households’ average capacities to absorb transport costs are likely
to have strong socioeconomic and ethnic dimensions, for example, and these variations in
may themselves impose profound limits on the social levelling that school choice might
otherwise bring about. Such limits may be additional to, and reinforcing of, the class and
ethnic stratification within education markets that themselves can also result from choice
programmes (Ball, 1993).
    Second, the prime locus for the implicit ‘trading’ of educational choices against the spatial
access (see Reay and Lucey, 2003) to those choices is assumed to be the residential housing
market. Alongside other factors, the housing market works as a structural determinant of
the reproduction of social inequalities. If key aspects of residential housing markets, both in
morphological (urban form) and outcome (price) terms, seem to have an impact on school
commuting patterns then this may offer important insights into how further liberalisation of
choice in education markets might affect socioeconomic and environmental sustainability
within cities. The key question addressed here is: does the structure of residential housing
markets explain school commuting patterns? If it is found that they do, this raises important
further questions about the role of residential property markets in working against some of
the putative benefits of educational choice in reducing social inequalities.
    We explore the above questions empirically, through an initial analysis of school
commuting and the residential housing market in Sheffield (England), a typical self-contained
urban education market. Some initial results are presented, and the paper goes on to discuss
their implications for a range of related policy issues while scoping out an agenda for further
research in this area.
Urban structure, choice, and equality within education markets
The access–space trade-off
The housing market is assumed to be the basic arena in which access to education and other
services are traded off against a host of other housing and neighbourhood characteristics.
The spatial fixity of housing means that house-price arbitrage occurs through the mechanism
of residential mobility. House prices (and rents) therefore capitalise not only features of
houses but the bundle of myriad attributes of the (wider) neighbourhood, including urban
form, as well as the aggregate accessibility to schools, jobs, and services implied by that
location’s urban structure (Olsen, 1969; Orford, 2000; Rosen, 1974). Choices that households
make involve complex behaviours, and their search activity is conditioned by (though not
determined absolutely by) the set of locational alternatives generated by their own resources
and the spatial structure of the city. The interrelations between urban morphology, house
prices, and school performance can be hypothesised because, over time, the aggregate
choices that households make—either directly in terms of school choice, or indirectly in
terms of residential location—will become structurally embedded as observable submarket
differentials between different neighbourhoods and housing types (Watkins, 2001).
Urban structure and form
There is a rich literature, especially from the US, on the impact of urban structure and urban
design characteristics on transport choices. The intellectual antecedents of this literature can
be traced back to the classic economic models of land use, such as the access–space trade-off models of Alonso (1964) and Muth (1969). In these models, which examine the relation
between consumption of space and ease of accessibility, the basic determinant of commuting
behaviour in general terms is distance, itself a function of urban structure. Although developed
with workplace commuting in mind, increases in the length of journeys to school (linked in
part to rises in car-borne workplace commuting) suggest that analyses of urban structure
could be logically extended to include school commuting as well.
    While such models are theoretically compelling, their practical value is somewhat limited
given the imposition of myriad other potential factors (Giuliano and Small, 1993). These
might include complex sociobehavioural determinants of travel, income, discrimination, and
other constraints on location choice, and variations in urban form (as opposed to structure).
Hence, despite relatively distinct eras in the historic development of cities, the evidence on
the impact of urban form on travel behaviour is ambiguous, although some clear factors
include residential density and the specific configuration of transport infrastructure. Studies
(for example, Cervero and Murakami, 2010; Giuliano and Narayan, 2003) have shown that
the density of urban areas can have an impact on the number and distance of trips made
as well as influencing choice of mode. Chatman (2008) opines, however, that increases in
density brought about planning policy are unlikely to influence travel behaviour on their own
without complementary policies serving to disincentivise certain behaviours (for example,
parking restrictions).
The role of education
The relations between school education, residential property markets, urban structures, and
sociospatial inequalities have been increasingly recognised (Fack and Grenet, 2010; Gibbons
and Machin, 2003; Leech and Campos, 2001). There has been an increasing evidence, for
example, of the extent to which educational quality within local ‘education markets’ is
capitalised into house prices (Cheshire and Sheppard, 2004; Fack and Grenet, 2010). Access
to good schools is also recognised as a key policy goal in breaking down entrenched social
problems and income inequalities.
    The response of residential property markets to school quality can serve to deepen
residential divisions. A ‘sorting process’ is created (Gibbons and Machin, 2003), shutting
out mainly those from disadvantaged backgrounds through both geography and the cost of
accessing neighbourhoods with better schools. The whole process is cyclic and reinforcing,
as demand to live near good schools both inflates prices and concentrates ‘catchment areas’
used to govern pupil admissions. Working counter to these trends are school choice policies
that serve to erode the spatial links between local neighbourhoods and schools and permit the
emergence of more fluid networks of relations between where pupils live and where they go
to school, although schools engaged in ‘cream skimming’ may enforce spatial controls more
rigidly (West, 2006).
     There has also been a rise in concern about the impact of suburbanised urban structures
and associated urban form characteristics on the abilities of school children to access local
schools, especially using healthy and environmentally sustainable forms of ‘active transport’
(McMillan, 2006; Panter et al, 2010a; 2010b; Schlossberg et al, 2010; Stewart, 2006). A set
of basic policy contradictions arises. Attempts to minimise school commuting (for example,
to lessen its environmental impact or promote active modes of travel) cut across the desire to
stimulate more fluid markets of choice.
Choice in education markets
Burgess and Briggs (2010) describe education markets in England as being highly complex,
using local administrative procedures to ‘match’ pupils to schools (explicitly and implicitly) on
the basis of various combinations of pupil ability, pupil and family characteristics (including
measures of poverty and income), locational characteristics, kinship ties, and geography.
The precise policies and procedures vary from place to place (and school to school), and the
extent to which parents are able to make explicit choices also varies.
     Despite concerns about stratification within local education systems, there is considerable
fluidity in the nature of the spatial relations between pupil and school. In England only around
half of secondary school pupils attending a state school actually attend their nearest school
(Burgess et al, 2006). Allen (2007) shows that, when more students attend their nearest
school, levels of social and ability segregation are lower. Despite the widespread use of
spatial determinants in the allocations processes, such as ‘catchment areas’ and locational
preferences, there are considerable overlaps in the effective zones of influence of schools
(Harris and Johnston, 2008). A further recent complication in England arises from moves to
encourage the establishment of ‘free schools’ outside of local authority control (Allen, 2010).
These schools operate with pedagogic and financial freedoms, with separate admissions
procedures, and are intended to stimulate more competition in education provision.
The impact of schools on house prices
There have been comparatively few UK studies analysing the capitalisation of school quality
into house prices, unlike in the US, where the empirical literature is far richer. Leech and
Campos (2001) use a small sample of house sales within the ‘catchment areas’ of two
schools in Coventry to demonstrate, after controlling for other determinants of price, that
membership of the school catchment zone increases house prices by between 16% and 20%.
Gibbons and Machin (2003) recognise that there is a weaker link between home and school
location in the UK than in other contexts (such as the US) and that this complicates attempts
to value ‘good’ schools. They also argue that it is primary (generally ages 4–11), rather than
secondary (11–16), schools that have the greatest local impact on housing markets owing to
their smaller size and service area. Orford (2000), on the other hand, finds that the spatial
effect of primary schools on house prices decays much more rapidly than that for secondary
schools.
     Cheshire and Sheppard (2004) use a hedonic specification to quantify the impact of
schools on house prices. Whilst they find that the quality (measured by examination results)
of both primary and secondary schools is capitalised into house prices, they also point to the
role of the distribution of quality in the local supply of schools in determining the strength
of this effect. They found secondary schools were valued more highly than primary schools,
contrary to the findings of Gibbons and Machin (2003). With the high long-term costs
involved in buying houses, parents are more likely to look towards the future to maximise
their investment.
Active commuting to school
The final strand of literature worth considering is that related to ‘active transportation’. This
interest has been galvanised around statistics that show that the proportion of schoolchildren
walking to school has fallen dramatically in recent years, to around 47% in 2010 for primary
schools (Department for Transport, 2011). Current trends would suggest that, for the first
time, walking to school may become overtaken by car use, which was recorded at 43%
and continues to rise. This is, however, not as dramatic for secondary schools (36% walk and
24% go by car), owing to the bigger role of buses. Trips to schools have also been steadily
getting longer, increasing by 13% over the decade since 2000. Allen (2007) estimates that in
aggregate secondary school pupils in England travel over 5 million km further per day than
they need to as a result of not attending the nearest school, representing an excess commute
of around 60% . This trend has been replicated globally among rich nations including Europe
(Fyhri et al, 2011) and North America (Buliung et al, 2009; McDonald, 2007).
     There has been increasing interest in the potential role that walking and cycling can
play in improving the health of schoolchildren. There is strong evidence regarding physical
activity levels and individual health (Bouchard et al, 2012; Hardman and Stensel, 2009). This
has become more important with the recent growth in obesity levels in England (Stamatakis
et al, 2010). Active transportation to school acts to establish, supplement, or provide an
alternative to physical activity. This is supported by Faulkner et al’s (2009) systematic review
which found that school children who commute using active modes of transport have higher
levels of physical activity. Nevertheless, Metcalf et al (2004) found that for five year-olds,
there was no difference in total physical levels between those who were driven to school and
those who used active forms of transport. There is also potential for increased exposure to air
pollution as children switch mode of transport.
     Very few studies explicitly link commuting behaviour to broader sociospatial and urban
structural contexts. Martínez-Gómez et al (2011), for example, look at adolescents’ lifestyle
traits to determine correlates with the choice to walk or cycle to school and find little in the
way of significant explanatory effects. That their study ignores measures of household income
and characteristics of the neighbourhood or local housing market, however, is potentially
significant in explaining these weak effects.
     A US study by Schlossberg et al (2006) found that, taken together, distance and urban
form factors accounted for around 41% of the variation in whether children walk from school
[they also found that the trip from school was more frequently made using active transport
(cf Larsen et al, 2009)]. They found that the density of street junctions and of cul-de-sacs (as
measure and inverse, respectively, of the walkability of the environment) were significant
predictors of children walking to school (although not necessarily of cycling).
     Whilst the urban form is an important driver, it is insufficient to consider it outside
of socioeconomic factors, including discourses arising from ‘complex social and cultural
values’ (Jones et al, 2012). Social norms and parental perceptions are as strong influences
on behaviour as physical urban form characteristics (Davison et al, 2008; McMillan, 2006;
2006). Areas with greater junction density can limit the ‘walkability’ of an area through
fear of traffic and safety issues (Barker, 2003). Distance is important in moderating these
influences: for example, safety concerns become more prevalent when the distance travelled
is longer (Panter et al, 2010a).
     Socioeconomic factors are not just important in affecting social views on transport. Many
studies have shown that children of low socioeconomic status are more likely to walk because
their parents are unable to afford a car (Davison et al, 2008; McDonald, 2007; Steinbach et al,
2012). This, however, was contrasted by Panter et al’s (2010b) findings, where an opposite
pattern was found once distance was controlled for (this was linked to issues surrounding the
perception of environmental safety). Owen et al (2012) also note ethnic variations in mode
of transport to school, with White children more likely to use active forms, Black children to
use public transport, and Asian children to be driven. Steinbach et al (2012) find similar, but
weaker associations for ethnicity.
Conceptual framework and hypotheses
In summary, there are important connections between perceptions of school performance (as
underpinning schooling choices), house price, and urban form. Each of these factors is related
to the journey to school. It is therefore possible to conceptualise these three interconnected
relations, as depicted in figure 1. These are: the relation between school quality and travel
to school [1(a) and 1(b)]; the relation between house prices and travel to school [2(a) and
2(b)]; and the relation between urban form and travel to school [3(a) and 3(b)]. There are also
relations between school quality and house prices (A); house prices and urban form (B); and
urban form and school quality (C).
     This conceptual framework gives rise to an array of interrelated hypotheses in which
travel to school (ie, the optimality and mode of travel choices) are either predictive of, or
predicted by, the other factors. So, for example, relation 1(b) might arise where poor local
school performance encourages ‘excess commuting’ (ie, nonoptimal aggregate travel)
associated with travel to better, but more distant, schools. Such longer commutes are less
likely to be undertaken using ‘active’ modes of travel. On the other hand, relation 1(a) might
explain why resource-poor families, who are unable to exercise choice due to high transport
costs, are restricted to more poorly performing schools. At the least, we can hypothesise a
correlative relation between school performance and aspects of travel to school.
     The housing market is also conceptually linked to travel to school. Good access to
schools, with a variety of modal choices, might be reflected in house prices [relation 2(a)],
while the desire to live in high price neighbourhoods, or those strong in market terms, may
necessitate certain forms of travel to school [relation 2(b)]. So there may also be a hypothetical
correlation between house prices and travel to school.
     Finally, we can hypothesise of a correlation between urban form and travel to school.
Specifically, relation 3(a) might suggest that car-dependent urban forms, which discourage
walking and cycling, might encourage longer commutes and discourage active forms of
travel to school. Relation 3(b) might result when the choice of neighbourhoods made by
resource-poor households is constrained because of travel to school considerations.
     These three general hypotheses are accompanied by a set of exogenous relations (A, B,
C), which may indirectly condition the relations between school performance, house prices,
urban form, and travel to school. The capitalisation of measures of school quality into house
prices would be represented by A; and the tendency for house prices to reflect urban form
characteristics would be represented by B. There is no immediately relevant direct hypothesis
linking school quality and urban form (C).
Methods
Sheffield is a relatively self-contained education market, with minimal levels of cross-border
commuting to school. Although self-contained, it is a large city with a population (according
to the 2011 Census) of approximately 552 700 persons. In 2009 the local education authority,
Sheffield City Council, controlled 38 secondary schools and 133 primary schools, although
there has been some reorganisation and consolidation since.
Data
The core dataset comprised an extract from a data file collected by Sheffield City Council for
the purposes of making a return to the School Census (formerly Pupil Level Annual School
Census, PLASC) maintained by the Department for Education (DfE). This anonymised
extract covered all primary and secondary school pupils in 2009 and was supplied by officers
working on a local ‘Safe Routes to Schools’ (SRTS) initiative. The data contained map
coordinates of the approximate home locations for each pupil and information on what year
they were in, their usual mode of travel to school, and the school that they attended. The
dataset contained information on 41 642 primary school pupils and 31 188 secondary school
pupils.
     Using the network analyst extension of ArcGIS, an origin–destination cost matrix was
produced for each pupil to calculate the network distance between each pupil and all possible
schools. The network distance of the closest relevant school was recorded, as was the network
distance of the actual school attended. This permitted the calculation of excess commuting.
The network analysis was based on the Integrated Transport Network (ITN) layer of the
Ordnance Survey’s Mastermap database as supplied by Edina Digimap. A limitation of this
method was that it assumes that pedestrians can walk only on roadside pavements (except
grade-separated dual carriageways and motorways). A future development of the model will
incorporate pedestrian footpaths but these data were not available as part of the ITN at the
time of analysis.
     Data on schools and school performance (taken as a proxy for school ‘quality’) were
extracted from the publicly available Edubase2 database maintained by the DfE. The specific
measure used for primary schools was the percentage of eligible pupils achieving level-4
English and Mathematics at national curriculum Key Stage 2 in the 2008/09 school year. For
secondary schools the chosen measure was the percentage of pupils achieving five or more
GCSEs (1) at grades A–C, including English and Mathematics in the 2008/09 school year.
These were chosen as they represent the expected standard that pupils should achieve at the
end of primary and secondary education.
     Two measures of neighbourhood characteristics were gathered. Average mix-adjusted
house prices were obtained for Middle level Super Output Areas (MSOAs) from the Joseph
Rowntree Foundation’s Housing and Neighbourhoods Monitor (Wong et al, 2009). Each home
postcode in the pupil dataset was assigned a range of absolute and relative price measures
on the basis of the MSOA it was a member of. Vickers and Rees’s (2006) sociodemographic
typology of English neighbourhoods was employed to attach a ‘neighbourhood type’ label
to each home location in the database. This enabled cross-sectional analysis using a broad
socioeconomic descriptor of areas and provided a proxy for broad housing submarkets.
    A range of urban form characteristics were created using the Mastermap database. Average
building density over a 500 m radius was calculated by extracting building polygons from
the Mastermap topology layer and calculating the density of their centroids using ArcGIS’s
Spatial Analyst extension (figure 2). The same process was applied to geocoded data on
residential postal delivery points obtained from the Office for National Statistics Postcode
Directory (ONSPD) to obtain a measure of residential density (figure 3).
    Two further urban form characteristics were modelled using network data obtained from
Mastermap’s ITN layer. Junction density was calculated using a development of Schlossberg
et al’s (2006) method as follows: a north-facing hectare-cell lattice (grid) was constructed with
extents equal to the Sheffield city boundary; the number of junctions with three or more paths
(ignoring directionality) was counted for each cell; this was then smoothed using a simple
radius of 500 m to represent the generalised junction density across an area approximate to
the walkable hinterland of each point. The resulting density surface is shown in figure 4. The
same process was used with ‘junctions’ with only one related edge to calculate the density of
cul-de-sacs (figure 5).
    Although more correctly describing ‘permeability’, these latter two measures were taken
as simple proxies for the inherent ‘walkability’ of the local neighbourhood. Although other
factors are important in measuring walkability [see Manaugh and El-Geneidy (2011) for a
recent review], we considered that, in general, a more walkable neighbourhood will have
a high density of junctions (and hence a higher density of possible routes). More walkable
neighbourhoods have fewer cul-de-sacs which can lead to unnecessary deviations and
additional journey lengths. As expected, the city centre is the most ‘walkable’ area of Sheffield,
but it is not the most populated. The areas with the highest residential density are found in
the older inner suburbs to the west of the city centre and some satellite townships. Other
‘walkability’ factors, such as perceptions of crime and safety, are clearly difficult to measure
at this scale. Although point-level crime data are now available, McDonald et al (2010) found
a weak relationship between crime and school travel and, while they cite fear of bullying as
an important factor, such incidents are rarely reported in crime statistics.
    Testing for correlation between the raster layers representing the measures of urban
form shows little interrelation between them (table 1). There is a moderately strong positive
correlation between building and residential density, which would seem appropriate.
However, the combinations of the other forms show that each is capturing a different pattern.
Limitations
Some important limitations remain as a result of the data and methods employed. No account
was taken of cross-border flows: that is, pupils originating outside the city but attending school
within the city, or vice versa. That said, Sheffield is a relatively self-contained education
‘market’ and the vast majority of pupils in our study travelled from within the city boundary.
No account was taken of the nature of schools and, in particular, the faith orientation (if
any) of specific schools. The data related only to state-supported schools under the control
of the local education authority and, in particular, did not include private schools (although
Sheffield has comparatively few of these) or the newer quasi-independent ‘academies’.
For analytical simplicity the whole school roll was used, which included pupils at a range of
levels and whose admissions were made over a number of years. Attribute data on schools
and neighbourhoods, by contrast, were taken from a single point in time. A more complex
analytical scheme would have separated students into year groups and used differential school
and neighbourhood attributes based on (imputed) year of admission to the school.
     Although mode of travel is often reported by schools in aggregate terms, the Sheffield
dataset permits analysis at the individual level. That said, ‘usual’ travel mode was self-defined by the respondent and does not account for environmental or structural variations
in children’s normal travel patterns. Most importantly, it assumes that travel to and from
school are undertaken by the same mode. Wong et al (2011) find important differences in
morning and afternoon commutes, on the other hand. Despite these limitations, the dataset is
remarkably complete and permits disaggregate analysis to a high level of spatial resolution,
making it ideal for this study.
Results
Proximity
Some 18 909 primary school pupils (45%) attended the school that was their nearest in
network distance terms. More than half of all primary school pupils, therefore, actually
attended a school which was not their nearest. The average network distance travelled by
primary school pupils was 1.39 km, while the average network distance to the nearest school
was 0.73 km. Some 12 832 secondary school pupils (41%) attended their nearest school in
network distance terms. A slightly higher proportion of secondary pupils than primary pupils,
therefore, attended a school that was not their nearest. The average network distance travelled
by secondary school pupils was 3.02 km compared with an average network distance to the
nearest secondary school of 1.49 km. On average, both primary and secondary pupils travel
around twice as far as they would in an ‘optimal’ system, suggesting that the option of choice
is clearly being exerted by pupils on a significant scale.
Excess commuting
It is instructive to consider the phenomenon of ‘excess commuting’ in more depth. Simply
put, excess commuting occurs where aggregate travel is greater than the minimum that might
be implied by a particular arrangement of homes and workplaces (or schools) (Horner, 2002;
Ma and Banister, 2007). Across the sample there was an estimated aggregate level of daily
excess commuting associated with travel to primary schools of approximately 27 500 km in
each direction (90.5% of the minimal possible commute). Unsurprisingly, the lowest levels of
excess commuting were associated with cycling (77%) and walking (48%) while the highest
levels were associated with motorised forms of transport, including taxis (462%), school
buses (307%), public buses (240%), and light rail (200%). Commutes by private car entailed
excess commuting of around 126%.
     Levels of excess commuting also varied according to the neighbourhood types from
which children started their commute. Children living in ‘city living’ (2) neighbourhoods on
average had the largest excess aggregate commute (135% of the optimal aggregate commute)
followed by those living in ‘multicultural’ (116%) and ‘constrained by circumstances’ (109%)
neighbourhoods. It is possible that these patterns are explained by the paucity of schools, or
of perceived problems with school quality, in central urban areas, which may encourage
families to send their children to more distant schools where resources allow.
    The lowest levels of excess commuting were associated with ‘countryside’ (54%) and
‘prospering suburbs’ (64%) neighbourhoods. In the case of countryside communities this
may be partly explained by the longer distances required to cover to reach any school (the
average network distance to the nearest primary school for ‘countryside’ residents was,
at 2 km, more than twice that associated with other neighbourhood types). Being located
further from services is likely to have translated into less choice. However, the relationship
for ‘prospering suburbs’ was not the same. Rather, children in these areas were more likely to
travel to their nearest school. These areas represent better off areas (Vickers and Rees, 2006)
and hence school quality may be playing an important role in the housing market through
neighbourhood selection. Actual network distances travelled to primary schools were only
marginally associated with school quality (r = 0.099, p = 0.000). There was, however, no
significant correlation between school quality and levels of excess commuting (r = 0.009,
p = 0.102).
    Although the distances travelled were generally greater, similar overall patterns were
found among secondary school pupils. There was an estimated aggregate excess commute of
around 43 700 km each school day in each direction. This represented a proportional average
level of excess commuting of 102%. The largest proportional levels of excess occurred among
those who used taxis (229%), school buses (218%), and public buses (148%). Car trips made
by secondary school pupils led to 96% excess commuting, surprisingly less than for cyclists
(123%). In terms of neighbourhood type, it was ‘multicultural’ (132%) and ‘blue collar’
(112%) communities that were associated with the highest levels of excess commuting.
These poorer communities (Vickers and Rees, 2006) tend to be more distant from ‘good’
schools and may be where choice is leading to longer commutes for children.
Mode
Fewer than half (46.1%) of secondary school pupils walked to school. Only 0.2% said that
they cycled (the topography of Sheffield is not as conducive to cycling as in other cities).
As might be expected, those travelling to their nearest school were far more likely to walk
than those travelling to a more distant school. Again as expected, given the shorter distances
involved, more primary school pupils (62.4%) walked to school (either accompanied or
unaccompanied). Those travelling to their nearest school were much more likely to walk. But
nearly two fifths of primary school children travelling to the nearest school were taken by car.
Whilst this may be seen as something policy could easily tackle, it is likely that most of these
journeys were part of a ‘trip-chain’ with parents dropping their children off before going on
to work. There were only slight differences by gender within secondary schools; however,
this was never significantly different.
Relationship to house prices
Previous studies (Cheshire and Sheppard, 2004; Leech and Campos, 2001) have demonstrated
a link between school quality and house prices on the basis of proximity. Table 2 shows
that there is a moderate but significant (p = 0.01) positive relationship between school
performance and both actual and nearest school. The relationship is stronger for the actual
schools that children attend than it is for the nearest school. Given that children from more
affluent neighbourhood types are more likely to attend their nearest school this is indicative
of both a house price premium and a close travel relationship associated with ‘better’ schools.
This effect appears to be even stronger for secondary schools.
    Table 3 provides a hedonic model of house prices based on the actual school of attendance
and other factors. For secondary school pupils, a 1 point increase in the percentage of resident
pupils obtaining five A–C passes including English and Maths increases house prices by
approx £2330. When the coefficients are standardised to allow for comparisons, this has
the largest value (ß = 0.561, p = 0.000). Other statistically significant (p = 0.05) predictors
of price include the network distance travelled to school and whether pupils travelled to
school using an active mode or by public transport. The higher the average house price of
a neighbourhood, the more likely that a child going to his or her nearest school will be to
walk or cycle to school if it is not far. All of the urban form variables are highly significant
predictors of the average house price of an area. The relationships mainly show that higher
house prices are found in areas, such as suburban localities, where there are more cul-de-sacs,
lower residential densities, and sparser road networks.
    Similar results were found when the analysis was carried out for primary school children
(table 4). Once again, school ‘quality’ was the strongest predictor of average house prices.
Interestingly, the standardised ß-coefficient was slightly less than for the equivalent variable
in the secondary school model, suggesting that secondary schools play a more important
role in defining house prices (although the models should not be directly compared). In
contrast to the secondary school model, the use of public transport was found to be negatively
related to price, which may relate to the distance pattern. It must be further noted that the
variables entered account for only around 45% of the variability in price in the secondary
school model and 28% in the primary school model, suggesting that there are a range of other
unobserved predictors.
Distance travelled
Analysing the actual distance travelled for each primary school pupil also produced some
insightful findings, although the study variables accounted for only around 17% of variability
(R2 = 0.166). Furthermore, the literature suggests that, while absolute distance is paramount
in predicting mode, there are complex interactions (such as with socioeconomic factors)
that were not included in our model specification. That said, three of the urban morphology
measures were significant (p < 0.05): junction density was positively related [B = 80.433,
standard error (SE) = 30.101] to distance travelled, as was residential density (B = 3.072,
SE = 1.319), while building density (B = -18.915, SE = 1.063) were negatively related. This
suggests that the walkability of an area affects the distance travelled to school: primary school
pupils living in higher density residential neighbourhoods appeared to travel further to school.
Pupils walking or cycling travelled around 1 km less to school on average (B = -921.984,
SE = 15.425).
    The same model was also applied for secondary school pupils (R2 = 0.326). There were
similarities to the primary pupil model. In particular, average house price was a significant
(p = 0.001) inverse predictor of network distance (B = -0.007, SE = 0.000). The performance
of the school attended was also significant (p = 0.01; B = 44.494; SE = 0.958). The effect of
‘walkability’ on distance was not evident for secondary pupils, although pupils living in areas
with a high density of cul-de-sacs had significantly longer commutes to school (a = 0.001,
B = 655.523, SE = 84.451).
Modelling ‘active’ commuting
Finally, the analysis sought to model the characteristics of those children using active
transport (ie, walking or cycling) to get to school. For primary school children, some obvious
patterns emerged (table 5). Where children had to travel further, they were less likely to
use active transport. If there was a good school nearby then children were more likely
to use active transport, although in general attending a good school reduced the probability
of using active transport. Earlier findings suggest that very long commutes associated with
school choice among pupils living in more deprived neighbourhoods may mask the shorter
commutes of pupils living near good schools. Indeed, higher house prices were associated with
children being more likely to use active transport to get to school. The notion of walkability
was once again borne out in the model, with junction density found to increase the likelihood
of children using an active mode. Higher residential densities also increased the odds of using
an active mode, while higher cul-de-sac density had the opposite effect. The inclusion of the
neighbourhood classification indentified three types of areas of importance. Those living in
areas classified as ‘constrained by circumstances’ were more likely to use active transport.
These areas are more impoverished (Vickers and Rees, 2006) and hence costs may restrict
their ability to use other forms of transport. The two other area types which were significant
were those which are more affluent (‘countryside’ and ‘suburbs’) and each had negative
relationships (though with the countryside areas, this is likely to be related more to distance).
    The model for secondary school children shows some similarities to the relationships in
the primary school children model. However, house price was not a significant predictor and,
while more walkable neighbourhoods did not exert as much of an influence on active travel
choices as in the primary school model, secondary school pupils living in the ‘prospering
suburbs’ were significantly more likely to walk or cycle to school.
Discussion
The results presented in this paper provide some tentative evidence of the hypothetical
links between housing markets, school performance, urban form and travel to school. While
the data and methods have some limitations and simplifications, the findings are generally
supportive of contributions in the separate literatures outlined at the paper’s outset, and can
be summarised with reference to the conceptual framework outlined earlier. House prices
appear to be negatively related to distance of travel to school [relation 2(a)], supporting past
research findings about ‘sorting’ (Gibbons and Machin 2003) and ‘cream skimming’ (West,
2006). Consistent with this, children from high-price neighbourhoods are more likely to go to
their nearest school [relation 2(b)]. Furthermore, school performance appears to be a stronger
predictor of house prices, for both primary and secondary pupils, as does urban form. House
prices were also shown to be positively related to ‘active’ commuting (for both sets of pupils),
probably due to house prices being higher where there is less distance to actual school.
     There was some support of past findings on active transport and urban form, such as
Cervero and Murakami’s (2010) work on built environment predictors of car use. The
‘walkability’ of an area appeared to be important in predicting active transport for primary
school children, although it was insignificant for secondary children. Cul-de-sac density was
also negatively related to active transport [relation 3(a)]. The relationships for secondary
school children existed, but appeared more complex. The possibility that school travel
imperatives might restrict movers to certain neighbourhood types [relation 3(b)] could not be
tested, though it should be noted that with rising fuel and public transport costs this type of
constraint is likely to become more important in the future. In general, urban form variables
were significantly related to house prices.
    Finally, school performance seemed to be somewhat important. The role of school
travel imperatives in constraining school choice [relation (1a)] was beyond the scope of the
analysis, but, as for relation 3(b), will be an important consideration for policy makers. The
impact of school performance on active commuting to school [relation 1(b)] was found only
for primary school pupils. Where there was a good nearby school, pupils were more likely
to walk.
    Together, these findings suggest the coexistence of significant, but complex, interrelationships between urban form (itself related to urban structure), school quality, and
housing markets. These relationships can be analysed through travel to school as the
prime geographic and dynamic connection between the home and school locations. The
interconnectedness of the relations highlighted in this paper suggest that educational goals
aimed at improving school choice, and planning goals aimed at improving urban structural
and transport efficiency, are doomed to remain in tension. The consequences are nontrivial in
terms of the sociospatial inequalities bound up in urban housing markets, and also in terms of
the levels of excess commuting that school travel patterns produce.