Modeling Bicycling to Elementary and
Junior High Schools with Bike Rack Counts

abstract
The decline in active travel to school and the concomitant rise in numbers
of children being driven to school in the United States over recent decades
have affected the health of school-age children and contributed to environmental 
problems. In response, communities throughout the country
are stepping up efforts to increase active travel, including bicycling, but
they have few tools available to them to assess the potential effectiveness
of proposed strategies. The purpose of this study was to develop a model
with aggregated school-level data of the factors associated with bicycling
to elementary and junior high schools and to examine the effectiveness
of this model in predicting bicycling to school. With the use of repeated
observations of bike rack counts at 11 public schools in Davis, California,
binomial multilevel regression models that included factors thought to
influence bicycling to school were specified. The models indicated that
comfortable bicycling routes, the racial and economic makeup of the student 
population, and various factors that represented the daily context
(e.g., day of week, season, weather) all were likely to influence rates of
bicycling to school. The results indicated that models based on aggregated
school-level data were not sufficient to predict the amount of bicycling to
a given school on a given day but were sufficient to predict mean bicycling
to a given school over a period of time. Thus this method may be sufficient
for policy analysis whose aim is to increase average bicycling to school.

Travel to school by school-age children in the United States represented 
almost a quarter of overall person trips and travel time in 2009
(1). Most of this travel was by automobile, although it had not always
been the case: the percentage of active travel to school declined from
41% in 1969 to 13% in 2009, while the share of children driven to
school steadily increased (1, 2). This mode shift has contributed to
environmental problems, such as poor air quality and increased greenhouse
gas emissions, and has become a significant source of traffic
congestion. These trends also have had a negative effect on the health
and well-being of children (3).
For these reasons, it is important to understand the factors that
could contribute to higher levels of walking and bicycling to school.
The decline of active travel to school in the United States has been
correlated with increased distances to school, which suggests that
travel time is a major constraint on student travel (2, 4). During
this period the percentage of students enrolled in their attendance-zone 
(i.e., assigned) public schools also declined (5). However, the

decline in active travel to school is not solely a function of increased
distances: even when distances are short (<1 mi), most students still
get to school by car (6). Bicycling to school is particularly unpopular,
and it may be that parental concerns about traffic safety are more of a
barrier than is distance. The quality of bicycling infrastructure thus
may play a key role.
The purpose of this study was to make use of easily collected data
to analyze factors associated with bicycling to school. Aggregate data
from the City of Davis, California, well-known for its bicycling culture, 
were used to develop models to quantify the effects of a variety
of factors on bicycling to elementary and junior high schools. The
models showed that comfortable bicycling routes, the racial makeup
of the student population, and various factors that represented the daily
context (e.g., day of week, season, weather) all influenced bicycling
to school. These models can be used to test the potential impacts of
proposed strategies to increase bicycling to school, and the method can
be replicated easily in other communities.

Background

Mode choice for travel to school can be framed as a joint choice
between the child and parent (7, 8). Although the age of the child
affects the child’s influence on the decision, the choice involves a complex 
suite of considerations, including proximity to school, safety
of neighborhood, safety of traffic, parent work schedule, proximity to
parent workplace, weather, bus or car availability, and attitudes toward
and preferences for particular modes. Although these factors are some
of the most salient with respect to mode choice to school, they are
difficult to measure, and this type of joint choice is difficult to model
in most data contexts (9). In most research on school travel, a few
parsimonious metrics are used to represent such factors (e.g., proportion 
of sidewalk coverage for traffic safety, proportion of houses with
windows that face the street for neighborhood safety) as predictors of
the choice to walk or bike to school (10).
However, these factors are likely to have different relationships with
the decision to walk and with the decision to bike (9, 11). This variability 
is particularly likely with respect to characteristics of the built environment 
and the attitudes of parents and children. Factors that make
an urban environment poor for walking, such as long blocks (i.e., low
intersection density) and incomplete sidewalks (12), may not make it
poor for bicycling (13). Attitudes and perceptions of children and of
parents about bicycling have been shown to affect the choice to bicycle
(14, 15). In Davis, parental encouragement and student comfort in riding 
a bike were found to influence bicycling to high school (16). The
decision to bicycle to school also has been correlated with age, gender,
neighborhood population density, school size, and grade level (9, 15).
Distance (or time) is a major constraint on school mode choice,
just as it is in mode choice with respect to other activities (4). One study

suggested that increased distances to school might have accounted for
about 50% of the decline in active travel (2). This estimate was consistent 
with results from a national survey, which showed that roughly
55% of U.S. parents identified distance as a barrier to walking to
school (17, 18). Not surprisingly, distances to school have increased
as trip distances in general have increased as a result of metropolitan
sprawl (2, 9). Along with increased distances to local schools as a
result of decreased densities, districts have been consolidating schools
and establishing magnet schools that draw from throughout the district. 
Parents often choose to place their children in a school other than
their neighborhood school: from 1993 to 2007, the percentage of children 
who attended their assigned local school declined from 80% to
73% (5). However, in 2007, some 27% of students reported that they
had moved to their current residence to attend a specific school (5).
Thus some families stayed put and their children traveled farther to a
neighboring school, while almost as many families decided to move
to a neighborhood to attend a specific school.
Although distance is a major constraint on active travel to school,
it may be that safety and comfort have more of an influence on
bicycling. In a study of four Oregon middle schools, even when residents 
lived close to neighborhood schools (<1 mi), mode to school was
still dominated by auto (>50% on the way to school), while only 15%
of students bicycled as their primary mode (11). With nationwide bike
mode share around 1%, safety is the primary concern for most wouldbe 
bicyclists (19). One of the major factors related to bicycling safety,
especially for school-age children, is automobile traffic.
The level of safety and comfort to bicycle within a given roadway
network’s traffic can be measured with the bicycle level of traffic
stress (BLTS) method (20). This method is based on Dutch design
standards, which themselves are based on studies of adult bicycling
behavior (20). Although this method was not intended to classify
road networks from the perspective of young bicyclists, it may provide 
a useful indicator of bicycling comfort. Only simple measures
of BLTS are provided in this present study. For a detailed investigation 
of the relationship between traffic stress and bicycling to school,
see Fitch et al. (21).

Methods

In most U.S. communities, bicycling represents a small share of school
travel. Davis, the setting for this present study, is a notable exception
(22). Davis, located near Sacramento, California, is a small city of
about 65,000 people, a large share of whom are students at the University 
of California, Davis. The city has made significant investments
over the past 50 years to build a network of on- and off-street bicycle
facilities (23). Although models developed with data from this setting
would likely overpredict bicycling if applied to other communities,
the method employed here to develop the models could be replicated
easily, particularly as bike mode shares rise across many cities in the
United States.
Aggregate school-level data were used to model the relationship
between predictor variables and bicycling to school. As described later
in this paper, the data on bicycling were derived from repeated observations 
of the number of bicycles in the bicycle racks at selected
schools. This approach was a cost-effective way to monitor bicycling
to school that could be readily applied to other geographic areas.
However, the use here of aggregate data raised the possibility that the
relationships revealed in the models did not accurately represent the
relationships that underlay individual decisions about mode of travel
to school (i.e., ecological fallacy) (24). Nonetheless, the method may
prove useful as a means to assess potential strategies to increase
bicycling to school.

Data

In an effort coordinated by a local bicycle advocacy organization,
parent volunteers collected bicycle count data for 11 public schools
in Davis (eight elementary and three junior high schools) by counting
bicycles parked at school racks in the morning several times over
2½ school years (Table 1). These data were collected on multiple
occasions at each school between October 2012 and February 2015
and resulted in 214 observation day–locations, 20 of which occurred

during a bike-to-school day event. Bike rack counts were validated
with a single-day in-class travel survey, which produced consistent
results (22). Additional data collected or compiled for this study came
from a variety of sources as follows:

• Temperature. This value was collected at the time of each school
count (for most counts). If the value was missing for a given date, the
historic daily low for the city of Davis on that date was used (25).
• Rain. Heavy rain (not light rain or fog) was recorded at the time
of each school count.
• Season. This factor was assigned on the basis of the date of the
school count (i.e., fall was September through November; winter
was December through February; and spring was March through
May).
• Bike-to-school day. Several bike rack counts occurred on the
promotional bike-to-school day, which was represented by a 1 or
0 dummy variable.
• Enrollment and school demographics. School enrollment and
demographics were obtained from the Educational Data Partnership
website for each corresponding school year (26). Data for the period
of 2013 to 2014 were used for the 2014–2015 school year, because
they were the only data available.
• Origins. The Davis school district has an open enrollment

policy, which allows attendance by students beyond neighborhood 
boundaries. Because neighborhood boundaries would not
provide an accurate representation of student origins, student
home locations during February 2013 were obtained from the
City of Davis. These origins were exhaustive for the school district 
during February 2013, and they served as a surrogate for all
other time periods.
• Distance and bicycling comfort. All geographic information system 
data needed for the network analysis were obtained from the City
of Davis or developed specifically for this study through heads-up
digitization or through manual database editing (27).

Network Classification and Summary

The BLTS method was used to classify the road network on the basis
of street characteristics associated with traffic stress for bicyclists
(20). The method is a rule-based classification of road segments and
intersections into four levels of stress, which range from low-stress
BLTS 1 (e.g., quiet neighborhood roads) to high-stress BLTS 4 (e.g.,
major arterial roads). For ease of discussion of the model results,
the term “comfortable” is used here to refer to routes with low traffic 
stress. The general steps taken to complete BLTS classification
follow:

1. Update the existing geographic information system roadway
network with bike paths, new roads, and other bike cut-throughs
(e.g., parking lots);
2. Update attributes for the network on the basis of aerial image
interpretation and existing geographic information system data;
3. Generate and update attributes for intersections;
4. Ensure that the network is topologically correct (e.g., no
overlapping links, no dangling nodes);
5. Assign each link to one of the four BLTS classes on the basis of
the number of lanes, on-street parking, speed limit, bike-lane width,
lane blockage, and presence of a centerline or a raised median through
the use of an automated routine;
Transportation Research Record 2587
6. Assign each intersection to one of the four BLTS classes on the
basis of right-hand turn lane length, abruptness, and average speed
with an automated routine; and
7. Update the BLTS classification of the links that begin or end,
or both, at intersections with higher BLTS by increasing the BLTS
of the link to match the highest intersection’s BLTS (i.e., weakest
link approach) (20).

After the classification was completed, a sample of roadway and
intersection attributes was validated in the field, and manual updates
were made to the network attributes, which resulted in adjustments to
the classifications. This final network was subdivided into four sub-networks: 
BLTS 1 (all links classified as Stress Level 1), BLTS 2
(all links classified as Level 1 or 2), BLTS 3 (all links classified as
Level 1, 2, or 3), and BLTS 4 (all links) (i.e., the entire network).
Two aggregate measures of bicycling comfort were calculated from
these networks for inclusion in the statistical models: (a) percentage
of students who attended the school who could bike to school on a
BLTS 1 network, and (b) percentage of students who could bike
to school on a BLTS 2 network. For a more thorough analysis of
BLTS, see Fitch et al. (21).

Model Development and Analysis

Aggregate binomial regression models were used to analyze the relationship 
between bike rack counts at each school and the predictor
variables. The unit of analysis was the bike, which could be extended
to the student, because all students were considered either to bicycle
or not to bicycle to school. With the student as the unit, the sample
size for this model was the number of observation days multiplied by
the number of enrolled students (n = 190,315). Because the analysis
used multiple measurements from each school, a standard binomial
regression model would have been biased by the correlations between
repeated observations at each school (10). A multilevel–hierarchical
binomial regression model structure thus was chosen because it pooled
the within-school variance (by estimating a unique intercept for each
school). Such models have been shown to increase out-of-sample
prediction (28).
To estimate the regression models, a Bayesian analysis framework
was used, because to specify regularization of prior probabilities can
guard against model overfitting, and because posterior probabilities
associated with Bayesian analysis have simple interpretations (29).
Through the use of the R statistical packages rethinking and rstan as an
interface for the probabilistic statistical programming language Stan,
the No-U-Turn sampler, a form of Hamiltonian Markov chain Monte
Carlo, was used to estimate the models (30). All models were compared 
with the use of widely applicable information criteria (WAIC),
which do not require multivariate Gaussian posterior distributions
and are well suited to multilevel models. Like all information criteria,
WAIC values constitute a relative measure, on the basis of model deviance, 
whose lower values indicate greater theoretical out-of-sample
prediction (29).
Along with a simple varying intercept-only model, three models 
were specified with predetermined groups of variables thought
to influence aggregate bicycling to school (Table 2). These were
nested models, starting with parsimony and adding complexity.
All models were specified with the same general form (i.e., the
only differences were the addition of predictor variables). For
illustration, one of the models including all of the variable groups
(Full) is as follows:

Although differences were expected in the factors that affected
bicycling to elementary and junior high schools, the commonalities 
were likely to outweigh the differences (i.e., to know something
about bicycling to elementary school helps to understand bicycling
to junior high school, and vice versa). Thus bicycling to elementary
schools and bicycling to junior high schools were modeled jointly,
and the varying intercepts were used to pool within school variability.

Results

Descriptive Results

Bicycle rack counts in Davis showed that junior high schools had a
higher proportion of students who bicycled to school than did elementary 
schools (34% and 20%, respectively). The median proportion of
students who bicycled to school in Davis ranged from 11% at Pioneer
Elementary to 47% at Holmes Junior High (Figure 1). Intraschool
variability was consistently high, especially at elementary schools
(Figure 1). All elementary schools recorded their highest proportion
of bicycling on a bike-to-school day; for some schools, proportions
on these days were more than double their medians. The spatial distribution 
of safe bike access around the schools, as indicated by the
BLTS classification, did not seem to correspond with proportions of
bicycling to school (Figure 2). For example, Montgomery and Pioneer
Schools had similarly low rates of bicycling to school. A high share
of students around Montgomery had BLTS 1 access, while students at
Pioneer did not. (Contact the authors for additional information and
interpretation of colors used in Figure 2.)
The variation in the proportion of bicycling between schools
also exhibited certain spatial patterns. South Davis schools (south
of Interstate 80) had low proportions of bicycling (e.g., Pioneer and
Montgomery), while centrally located schools had higher proportions 
(e.g., Holmes, North Davis, and Birch Lane). Although the
spatial distribution of those who biked to school was not the focus of
this study, the findings here might offer a new explanation for the
relatively low rates of south Davis students who bicycled to high
school, namely, experience in bicycling to school (16).

Model Results

The intercept model, which was the first model, included only a mean
intercept and a varying intercept for each school (i.e., no predictor
variables) and provided information about the variability of bicycling 
at each school. Parameter estimates (i.e., intercepts) and their
corresponding 90% highest posterior density intervals indicated considerable 
variance between schools (not shown). Cesar Chavez, Montgomery, 
and Pioneer Schools had confidently negative intercepts,
which indicated a lesser likelihood of bicycling relative to the other
schools, while Holmes and Harper Schools had positive values, which
indicated a greater likelihood. However, these differences became
more uncertain in later models in which added variables explained
differences in bicycling to each particular school.
The day model added variables that reflected the context for each
collection day, including day of week, morning temperature, morning 
rain, season, and bike-to-school day. All days of the week had
parameter intervals closely centered around 0, which indicated that
they might not have influenced bicycling. The exception was Friday,

with a posterior density almost entirely in the negative range, which
indicated less bicycling on Fridays (Figure 3). Higher morning temperatures 
and days in the fall season increased the likelihood of
bicycling to school. Also, a bike-to-school day event increased the
likelihood of bicycling to school, while rain had a confidently strong
negative effect.
The school model added race, economic, and distance variables
to the day model. A greater percentage of Hispanic students had
a positive but uncertain effect on bicycling, while the percentage
of African-American students had a negative effect, which was
uncertain in magnitude. The percentage of male students had an
uncertain effect, while the percentage of students who received a
free or reduced-price lunch (a surrogate for household income) had
a confidently negative effect on bicycling. Finally, the mean shortest
distance to school had little to no expected effect on bicycling but
with a large uncertainty (Figure 3).
The full model, which was the final one, added the percentage
of students with access to school on BLTS 1 and BLTS 2 networks.
Results indicated that BLTS 1 had an uncertain effect on bicycling to

school. Similarly, BLTS 2 had an uncertain effect, albeit a predominant 
one (as indicated by its posterior distribution), on bicycling to
school (Figure 3). These results showed that aggregate measures of
comfortable access to school might be indicative of greater bicycling
but also that further examination of BLTS was likely to be needed to
make such a statement confidently.
Overall, the school and full models had roughly equal predictive
power (i.e., equal Akaike weight) (Table 2). An ensemble of these two
models (i.e., synthesized estimates in which each model was weighted
by its Akaike weight) predicted the mean bicycling rate at each school
with considerable accuracy (±1%). However, the ensemble model
contained considerable errors with respect to daily predictions at individual 

schools. Many observations had a residual variance that was
greater than 20% (Figure 4). Future research should attempt to address
these errors through consideration of new variables or theoretically
motivated variable interactions.


Discussion of Results

The results demonstrated that the daily variation in bicycling to
school in Davis was wide, especially given that most data were collected 
on rain-free mornings. The findings suggested that, for a large
group of students, bicycling to school was not a 5-day-a-week routine

but an option among alternatives, which was chosen on some days
but not on others.
This analysis did not reflect the various bike promotional programs
at each school. A consideration of these programs was excluded primarily 
because it would have been difficult to quantify how each individual 
program might have affected bicycling to school rates without
before and after rack counts. Although the school-specific intercepts 
in the model at least partly captured these differences, bicycling
programs may have had a moderating influence on the relationship
between the predictor variables and bicycling rates. To include varying
slopes in future models may help account for these differences.
In a comparison of the statistical models, the full and school
models had equivalent WAIC values, which suggested that they had
equivalent predictive power. The WAIC values were expected to
improve after BLTS variables were added but did not hinder inferences 
that BLTS variables might have helped to explain bicycling
(particularly BLTS 2). It was suspected that the equivalent WAIC
values were related to the large measurement error, which was added
to the BLTS variables once they were aggregated from individuals
to schools.

The most striking result from the model parameters was how
uncertain the effects were of comfortable access on bicycling-to-school 
rates (Figure 3). The fact that access by BLTS 2 was more
influential than was BLTS 1 suggested that, in Davis, parents and
students might have accepted some traffic stress. These results may
indicate that a culture of bicycling increases the perception (and perhaps 
the reality) that bicycling is safe and comfortable (i.e., safety
in numbers) (31). Another surprising result was the lack of influence
that distance had, whereas other studies of active travel to school
have shown it to be influential (9). However, neighborhood schools
in Davis have network distances to school that are much shorter than
the national average (mean of 1.1 mi versus 4.4 mi, nationally) (1).
Thus it may be that distance to neighborhood schools in Davis is
less of a constraint than in other cities.
This study offers three alternative methodological explanations
as to why the influence of BLTS and distance on bicycling is largely
uncertain. First, the average shortest distance for all origins may not
be appropriate to determine the probability of each student bicycling
to school. This problem stems from the fact that, because the study
modeled bicycling to school in the aggregate, it was necessary to

aggregate individual measures of distance to school. Related to this
problem were the limited data on student origins. Because data on
origins were available only at one time period (February 2013), the
distance and BLTS counts were subject to unknown measurement
error in all other time periods. Second, it was possible that the BLTS
classification was not a suitable measure of traffic stress for young
students. Future analysis should explore which roadway characteristics 
contribute to a more appropriate classification for bicycling
to school. Last, it may be that the effects of distance and comfort
on bicycling are more complex than the models used in this study
suggest. A recent study that focused on traffic stress and bicycling
to school in Davis suggested that an interaction between distance
and comfort might have a stronger association with bicycling at the
school level (21).
The largely uncertain influence of the percentage of male students 
on bicycling rates was likely the result of a lack of interschool
variance. Given that most schools had nearly 50–50 gender splits,
the influence of gender on bicycling to school must be examined on
a disaggregate level. The opposite effects of the percentages of Hispanic 
students and of African-American students were surprising,
given that active travel to school in general was higher at schools
with higher proportions of Hispanic and African-American students
(3). The results suggested that the effect of Hispanic students in
Davis was consistent with the literature, but the effect of African-American 
students was the opposite. It is speculated that in many
communities the percentage of African-American students at a
school may be more reflective of schools with predominately lower-income 
households but that outcome was not the case in this study.
The percentage of African-American students at all schools was
similar (~3%), with the exception of Patwin (5.4%), and because
these effects were conditional on the percentage of students eligible
for a free or reduced-price lunch (surrogate for income). Therefore,
conditional on all the other variables, the results indicated that less

bicycling to school occurred when the percentage was greater of
African-American students or students of low household income.
These results suggested that, in Davis, cultural differences may
exist with respect to bicycling to school, and that income may not be

a barrier to driving to school. Without a collection of mode choice
data, however, no conclusions could be reached with certainty
(i.e., schools with a higher percentage of low-income families
could have had more options to walk or to take a bus even if they
had fewer options to bicycle).

It was not surprising that lower morning temperatures, Fridays, and
winter and spring all decreased the likelihood of bicycling to school
in Davis. Morning temperatures in Davis winters can be below freezing, 
and in winter and spring considerably more rain can fall than in

the autumn (although drought conditions prevailed from 2012 to 2014
when the data were collected). Also, lower attendance at school occurs
on Fridays in general and often entails family plans for travel outside
of the city, which could make bicycling inconvenient. Perhaps most

striking in the day-level covariates was Wednesday’s lack of a strong
effect. On Wednesdays in Davis, elementary schools have shortened
school days, and junior high schools start late. It was hypothesized
that both of these factors might disrupt the normal routine of school
travel. Furthermore, the most extreme ensemble model residuals were

examined (e.g., those plotted outside of the shaded region of Figure 4),
and it was discovered that most of those predictions were for Wednesdays. 
Thus the models had great difficulty in predicting bicycling on
Wednesdays, even after a Wednesday dummy variable was added.

The implication was that there might be unobserved variables (e.g.,
parental work status) whose addition would improve Wednesday
travel predictions.

Conclusions

New evidence is presented on variables that influence bicycling to
school in various contexts, including day-to-day and intraschool variations. 
The results of this study suggest the need for further investigations 
into the use of BLTS to evaluate comfortable access to school.
In addition, the results indicate that the racial and socioeconomic
makeup of a student population and various factors that reflect the
daily context (e.g., day of week, season, weather) all influence the
rate of bicycling to school. Model predictions showed that aggregated
school-level data were not sufficient to predict daily bicycling to each
school (i.e., errors of ±23% on average) but that the data were sufficient 
to predict average bicycling to each school (±1%) and thus may
be sufficient for policy analysis whose aim is to increase the average
rate of bicycling to school. The modeling framework presented here,
with the use of aggregated bike rack counts, is a low-cost approach to
measure bicycling and can be used by any school district or planning
agency to examine programs to encourage biking to school.