Children and sustainable mobility: small feet making smaller carbon footprints
         
Whilst there is an extensive body of research on the social and environmental concerns 
associated with private car usage and the role of the built environment and urban form in 
sustainable travel, there is limited focus on children’s active contribution to these trends,
both as part of the problem with their carbon intensive travel patterns and as part of the
solution with their capacity to be agents for a positive change. Private cars are heavily relied 
on by families with children that lead to a wide range of health and environmental issues. In 
the context of the ‘pre-cognitive, habitual’ theories of travel behaviour, these travel patterns 
are likely to be carried into their adulthood. Policy responses to tackle these issues (such as
urban consolidation policies) do not generally make room for children in their deliberations.
This article aims to explore the place of children in the trends and discourses related to car
dependence and sustainable travel in Australian cities and calls for a greater attention to
children’s travel patterns for more e<U+FB00>ective policies and longer-lasting bene<U+FB01>ts.

Introduction

										
The intrinsic a<U+FB03>liation between urbanisation and the                         
transport technologies including mass car production                         
has been widely reported in the literature. The mobility                     
a<U+FB00>orded by mass production of cars and cheap oil                             
resulted in the development of unprecedented urban                           
sprawl across the world. For many years the construction 
of highways was endorsed as an automatic                                
response to mobility issues such as tra<U+FB03>c congestion                            
and the demands of the ever spreading cities characterised 
by low density and segregated land uses. More                           
recent attention has focused on the term ‘sustainable                        
travel’ which is often used interchangeably with the                         
terms ‘sustainable transport’ and ‘active travel/transport’. 
The term encompasses the activities of walking,                       
cycling and usage of public transport. Given the widening 
presence of ‘scootering’ and ‘skating’ particularly                         
among children and young people, the de<U+FB01>nition of                            
‘sustainable travel’ can also be broadened to include                        
these activities. However in the Australian context,                         
the practice of highway building still dominates the                         
current transport policies in major cities such as Sydney, 
Melbourne and Perth (Legacy, Curtis, and                                
Scheurer 2017) and Adelaide (North–South Corridor                            
Motorway, Government of South Australia 2017a).                              
Growing concern about the negative social and                            
environmental impacts of car oriented mobility is                            
increasingly challenging these practices. For example,                       
road transport related carbon emissions (mainly from                         
passenger motor vehicles) account for 10%–35% of                             
total carbon emissions in countries such as US,                              

Canada, UK and Australia. A deliberate policy and
practical change to move away from the construction
of car oriented infrastructure to non-motorised infrastructure 
to support walking, cycling and public transport 
use has resulted in a substantial reduction in car
usage and associated environmental issues in cities
like Amsterdam and Copenhagen (Gehl 2013; Montgomery 
2013; McLellan et al. 2014).
Much of the current literature on sustainable travel
pays particular attention to the ‘journey to work’. In the
Australian context, this is particularly evident in the
Australian Bureau of Statistics census data which
codes residence and workplace for people in the paid
workforce (ABS 2011). Apart from infrequent household 
surveys, children’s travel patterns do not appear
in these statistics.
In terms of individual research projects related to
children’s travel behaviours, a great deal of attention
has been given to the health implications of reduced
physical activity levels, such as obesity, diabetes and
various cardiovascular diseases (Rahman, Cushing,
and Jackson 2011; Epstein et al. 2012; Sallis et al.
2012; Villanueva et al. 2013; Giles-Corti et al. 2014).
The methodology adopted in these studies has led to
an increased consideration of children’s health issues
in relation to built environment design, but not to
the underlying connection between the lifestyle of children 
and the demand they create for private car usage.
While a few scholars have emphasised the link between
child friendly cities and sustainable cities (Tranter and
Pawson 2001; Malone and Tranter 2003; Tranter and

Sharpe 2008), the place of school aged children in the
growing trends of private car usage and associated carbon 
emissions outcomes still remain under-researched.
This paper aims to provide a deeper insight into the
environmental issues associated with school aged children’s 
current travel patterns to school and other
activities by reviewing the literature and data available
from Australia and overseas.

De<U+FB01>ning child friendly cities

The term ‘child friendly’ has come to be used to refer to
the UNICEF Child Friendly Cities Initiative that is the
embodiment of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child (CRC) that was developed in 1989. This
de<U+FB01>nition states that a child friendly city is actively
engaged in ful<U+FB01>lling the right of every young citizen
to a wide range of rights, including their participatory
rights in their communities as equal citizens, their
rights to be safe and protected from harm and their
rights to have environments supporting their needs
to learn, play and be social (UNICEF 2013).
The term ‘child friendly’ embodies a multitude of
concepts. More importantly these concepts are not limited 
to having access to basic services or protection
from violence and abuse but nevertheless include the
characteristics that are preconditions for children’s
lives beyond basic living requirements. More pertinently 
to children in the Global North who have
basic needs, including safety, ‘child friendly’ implies
the conditions that need to exist to enhance children’s
health and wellbeing, now and into their futures.
Though there is a perceived degree of simplicity in
the notions such as ‘walk safely in the streets on their
own’ or ‘meet friends and play’, the current conditions
of Australian cities and contemporary lifestyles of children 
do not support these seemingly simple goals,
which cannot be taken for granted in the absence of
conscious design and policy measures.
The multidimensional nature of child friendliness
has been exempli<U+FB01>ed by few scholars. In the <U+FB01>ndings
of the UNESCO initiated project Growing Up in an
Urbanising World, Chawla (2002) lists both the positive
and negative indicators for ‘child based environmental
quality’. In relation to neighbourhood environment,
‘safety and free movement’, ‘peer gathering places’,
‘varied activity settings’ and ‘safe green spaces’ are
listed as positive indicators. On the contrary, ‘heavy
tra<U+FB03>c’, ‘lack of gathering places’ and ‘lack of varied
activity settings’ indicate low environmental quality
for children (Chawla 2002, 229). Chatterjee (2005)
also argued that child friendly places require a ‘diverse
range of physical and social settings from the immediate 
environment of the child to citywide locations’.
A recent report by the global planning, architecture
and engineering <U+FB01>rm ARUP also a<U+FB03>rms the importance 
of an integrated approach to child friendliness

(Wright et al. 2017). For example, the traditional role
of streets for moving tra<U+FB03>c has been challenged in
the German city of Freiburg, with the recognition of
their importance as multifunctional public places for
children (31).

Children’s private car usage

The increased number of car trips taken by children and
young people as passengers globally has been highlighted 
by McMillan (2013) and Fyhri et al. (2011).
The decrease in walking and public transport trips to
school were most pronounced for the younger age
groups across developed countries (McMillan 2013)
while the car ownership rates were noticeably higher
in households with young children compared to other
household types (Fyhri et al. 2011). Australian statistics
reveal that transport is the third largest source for greenhouse 
gas emissions in Australia after electricity and
stationary energy (Pink 2010). Though the share of
transport sector for emissions of 13% is smaller than
for other developed countries (20%–30% for North
America and up to 20% for Western Europe) (IPCC
2014) the historical data reveals a sharp increase of
52% between 1990 and 2015 (Australian Government
2015b). In addition, these datasets disclose that passenger 
cars are the largest transport source for these
emissions.
The statistics in relation to purpose of car trips in
Sydney indicate a signi<U+FB01>cant share and growth in the
‘to serve passengers’ segment of these car trips, more
signi<U+FB01>cantly for the age group of 5–19 years. For
example, between 1991 and 2001, the annual percentage 
increase in the number of car passenger trips by
the age groups of 5–14 and 15–19 years were signi<U+FB01>cantly 
higher than the actual population growth in
these groups (for the age group of 5–14, over 3%
annual growth in children’s car trips as passengers
compared to a decline in the total population of this
age group, for the age group of 15–19 over 4% increase
in children’s car trips as passengers compared to 1%
increase in the total population of this age group)
(NSW Government 2005).
More recent travel survey data across Sydney displayed 
a substantial increase in education related car
trips compared to work related trips. For example,
between 2001 and 2011, the highest increase in car
tips were in the social/recreation and education/childcare 
trips (each by 17%). For the same period, both
work related business trips and personal business
trips decreased (by 17% and 16% respectively) (New
South Wales Government 2013).
In addition, further studies revealed that 71% of 0–14
year old children’s trips are in cars, mainly occurring for
education and childcare related transportation (Garrard 
2009; Whitzman and Mizrachi 2012). In terms of
the kilometres travelled, 87% of the total kilometres

travelled were as car passengers (Garrard 2009). Some
of these increases in children’s car trips are attributed
to the increase in the distance travelled for these services
due to the closure of local schools and families not
necessarily choosing the closest schools (Sharpe and
Tranter 2010; Garrard 2011), however for the majority
of Australian children particularly for primary education, 
the distance to school is relatively short (within
feasible distances for walking up to 1 km and cycling up
to 5 km) (Ridgewell, Sipe, and Buchanan 2005; Garrard
2009; Sharpe and Tranter 2010).
Two important implications that emerge from this
research are the direct carbon emission outcomes due
to the signi<U+FB01>cant increase in the number of car trips
and the long term implications in the form of loss of
opportunities for school aged children to physically
engage with their local environments that leads to a
loss of spatial awareness due to the large amount of travel 
time spent in cars. Indeed, it is argued that children’s
sense of place and environmental awareness which are
essential for environmentally sustainable lifestyles are
diminishing (Tranter and Pawson 2001; Sutton and
Kemp 2002; Mitchell, Kearns, and Collins 2007).
Children play a critical role in sustainable mobility
not only due to their current car dependent lifestyles
but their unique capacity for being ‘change agents’
(Heft and Chawla 2006, 2007, 2009; Sharpe and Tranter 
2010; Malone 2013, 2015) for their own travel needs
as well as for their household travel choices as a whole
and ‘indicator species’ (Enrique Penalosa quoted in
Tranter and Sharpe 2012) in achieving sustainable
neighbourhoods now and in securing the changes
needed for a sustainable future. These implications
and children’s critical role in sustainable mobility will
be further discussed in the following section.

Children’s pivotal role in sustainable
mobility

The importance of ‘habitual learning’ (O’Brien et al.
2000; Tranter and Pawson 2001) in earlier ages has
been stressed in some studies and also by the United
Nations. For example, in its ‘children on the front
line’ document (2015, 76), UNICEF stated that ‘sustainable 
thinking from a young age onwards is more
likely to have a lasting e<U+FB00>ect than trying to modify
already ingrained habits later in life’. Similarly the
‘habitual’ nature of travel behaviours and the di<U+FB03>culty
surrounding overcoming this path dependency is
widely acknowledged (Tranter and Pawson 2001;
Schwanen, Banister, and Anable 2012; Thynell and
Wolmar 2014; Chatterton et al. 2015) which once
again emphasises the importance of early intervention

in the context of travel behaviour.
Undoubtedly, school aged children and families will
continue to gain knowledge of environmental issues
and of their own carbon footprints through the

environmental education within school curriculums
and general ease of access to data through internet
and media which could play an important role in the
formation of environmentally sustainable lifestyles.
However as Chawla (1992) stated, increased environmental 
knowledge does not translate to deepened feelings 
for environment and that ‘place attachment’ has a
critical role in creating ‘enduring e<U+FB00>ects’ (even after
childhood ends) and ‘active interest’ in environment
(73, 83). Similarly, other scholars have emphasised
the importance of ‘learning through environmental
interaction’ and ‘learning by doing’ for sustainable travel 
habits compared to formal curriculum activities for
environmental learning (Malone and Tranter 2005;
Schwanen, Banister, and Anable 2012; Chatterton
et al. 2015).
For any educational activity for sustainability to
translate into behaviour change and practice on a
daily life, it is critical to complement them with other
strategies. For e<U+FB00>ective promotion of active travel,
there is a need to combine a range of infrastructure
and non-infrastructure projects. Davison, Werder,
and Lawson (2008) highlighted the important role educational 
community programs played in successful outcomes 
of safe routes to school projects in the US.
Similarly McDonald and Aalborg (2009) emphasised
that infrastructure alone is not su<U+FB03>cient for successful
active travel policies and educating and encouraging
families and children is essential to achieve behavioural
change. In countries such as Denmark, Holland and
Germany, the active travel education is provided
beyond formal curriculum and supported with extensive 
practical training, which results in daily practice
for children and wider communities (Schwanen, Banister, 
and Anable 2012; Faherty and Morrissey 2014).
In terms of the importance of education for behavioural 
change, O’Brien (2001, 2003) highlighted the

e<U+FB00>ectiveness of communicating with parents on the

negative impacts of cars on their children such as
tra<U+FB03>c related injuries, children’s greater susceptibility
to air pollution, loss of opportunities for play, physical
activity and social interaction. Social, mental and
emotional issues associated with the loss of play opportunities 
in their local environments were further examined 
by other researchers. For example, Gray (2013)
and Tranter (2016) reported that this phenomenon
was associated with the prevalence of mental disorders,
loss of essential life skills such as sense of belonging,
con<U+FB01>dence, creativity, negotiation and getting along
with others due to highly organised lifestyles of today’s
children.

Recent trends of car dependency

It has been well documented that private car use is signi<U+FB01>cantly 
correlated with urban sprawl and urban
design as an impediment to sustainability on many

levels (Girardet 1999, 2010; Newman and Kenworthy
1999, 2006; NewUrbanism.org 2010). Recently, the
term ‘peak car use’ has been used to refer to a growing
phenomenon of decreasing car ownership and use, particularly 
among young people (aged 16 years to midtwenties) 
across the world (Newman and Kenworthy
2011; Kuhnimhof et al. 2012).
Some scholars have challenged these counter-trend
claims on the grounds that it is unknown whether
the young people’s reduced car use is maintained
when they grow older (Goodwin and Van Dender
2013; Frändberg and Vilhelmson 2014). It has been
argued that a wide range of factors need to be considered 
to be able to fully explain this theory. These factors 
include the gendered di<U+FB00>erences in these trends
(for example young women’s car ownership rates
have been catching up with those for men in Europe)
and the overall ‘postponement of adulthood’ such as
studying longer, participating in the workforce later
and earning less therefore delaying car ownership (Delbosc 
and Currie 2013; Frändberg and Vilhelmson 2014;
Garikapati et al. 2016).
Delbosc and Currie (2013) examined possible causes
for this trend and found the evidence for delaying or
forgoing was unclear for most countries. Out of all
the evidence available, they stated that only changes
in ‘life stage milestones’ and ‘household living arrangements’ 
had clear links with this trend indicating a delay
in getting a driving licence (286). They also repeated
the importance of integration of land use and transport
system to facilitate any behaviour change towards getting 
a driver’s licence.
Delbosc (2016) examined single year cohorts year by
year (i.e. from the time they are 16 until they reach mid
20s). The o<U+FB03>cial data for both the United States and
Victoria, Australia con<U+FB01>rmed that the decline in the
proportion of 18 year olds with a driver’s licence was
not apparent when they reached their mid 20s. She
concluded that the life stage related delays such as
studying longer, gaining a full time job and becoming
a parent later were consistent with the delays in licensing. 
More importantly, she emphasised the unique
opportunities associated with each year without a car
for young people in relation to sustained behaviour
change for sustainable travel patterns. Namely, that if
this window of opportunity is missed, the travel habits
are hard to break, particularly after transitioning to
parenthood. This concern is in line with other scholars
emphasising the increased car reliance among families
with children (Fyhri et al. 2011; McMillan 2013). Delbosc 
(2016) believed that these opportunities could be
best seised through the creation of environments where
the land use and transport systems are integrated to
make active travel a viable option.
There are a number of reasons for high rates of private 
car usage amongst families with children. Children’s 
daily lives and needs are a<U+FB00>ected by the

general trends in household socio-economic status
and type of school (public versus private) (Chillón
et al. 2009), car ownership rates, increased female
employment rates, increased access to mobile phone
which reduces the amount of time in advance for the
planning of daily activities (Fyhri et al. 2011). Taken
together, these socio-economic factors contribute to
children’s reduced independent mobility and reliance
on ‘parental taxis’. Moreover, this highlights the importance 
of child friendly neighbourhoods to successfully
attend to children’s mobility needs, regardless of the
availability of parental assistance. A recent Australian
study by Ghekiere et al. (2016) explored the moderating 
role of parental accompaniment on the relationship
between children’s active travel and neighbourhood.
Though the <U+FB01>ndings indicated a limited moderation,
they further supported the importance of neighbourhood 
environments being conducive to walking and
cycling for school aged children regardless they are
accompanied by adults or not.

Reducing car use related carbon emissions –
policy responses and trends

Overall, the research investigating factors associated
with car dependence has focused on two intervention
areas including urban form (particularly in the context
of urban consolidation) and technology aiming to
improve fuel e<U+FB03>ciency. This section will examine
these two policy responses and trends and the consideration 
given to children in these deliberations.

Urban consolidation policies to tackle car
dependence

Higher density, mixed use developments are increasingly 
being promoted and delivered as a new form of living 
in Australian cities in an attempt to minimise sprawl
and to transform car dependent low density neighbourhoods 
into more walkable, connected and sustainable
communities (New South Wales Government 2014;
Government of South Australia 2017b; Victoria State
Government 2017). A review of Australian metropolitan 
strategies towards sustainable cities indicate that
high density, mixed land use near transport corridors
and nodes seem to be treated as the core ingredients
of these sustainable developments. However there is a
general tendency to ignore potential occupancy by
households with children, through not regulating unit
mix or minimum unit size and neglecting to plan for
social infrastructure such as childcare centres, playgrounds 
and primary schools (Randolph 2006; Woolcock, 
Gleeson, and Randolph 2010; Whitzman and
Mizrachi 2012; Reid, Lloyd, and O’Brien 2017). On
the other hand, it has been argued that the a<U+FB00>ordability
of higher density housing compared to other housing
types is an important reason for higher density to be

family friendly and that families with children need to be
recognised as a sub-market (Easthope and Tice 2011).

Technological <U+FB01>x to the carbon emission
outcomes of private car use

The long term trends reveal that technological
advancements which improve fuel e<U+FB03>ciency are somewhat 
o<U+FB00>set by increases in power, weight and the popularity 
of four wheel drive (4WD) vehicles (Australian
Government 2015a). The recent car sales statistics
(Table 1) reveal that the Toyota Hilux remains the
best-selling vehicle in Australia followed by the Ford
Ranger (FCAI 2017).
In addition, the longevity of the Australian light car
<U+FB02>eet at around 10.1 years (ABS 2015) suggests that relying 
on improvements in motor vehicle fuel e<U+FB03>ciencies
to reduce carbon emissions will require a long lead
time, and replacing outdated ine<U+FB03>cient motor vehicles
will be challenging in a di<U+FB03>cult economic climate for
many Australians. The data in relation to the factors
considered when purchasing a vehicle also shows that
the purchase price was the most common factor (53%)
followed by fuel economy and running costs (41%).
For example, in 2008 only 1% of car sales in Australia
were ‘green cars’ (emissions not exceeding 120 g/km
of CO2) compared to 11% in the UK, and the environmental 
impact/exhaust emissions were considered by
only 4% of Australian buyers (Pink 2010). Correspondingly, 
the Australian car market recently saw the withdrawal 
of hybrid and electric cars by major companies
such as Toyota, Holden, Nissan and BMW due to the
lack of demand from buyers and lack of policy interest
by the government (CarAdvice 2017; Fairfax Network
2017). For example, the senior management at BMW
publicly criticised the Turnbull Government for not
encouraging the supply of low emission vehicles
through taxing regimes (Motoring 2017).

Conclusion

The social, economic and environmental pressure on
our cities and mobility demands will continue to
grow along with fast paced urbanisation. Because of
this, the environmental issues of sprawl, car dependency 
and corollary social issues are likely to remain
as the focus of urban research in the coming decades.
Due to the pressing environmental problems facing
our planet, we need a radical change in our cities to

facilitate sustainable mobility. Replacing private car
usage with active travel requires a concerted approach.
In this, we argue there is no better place than school
aged children’s daily lives to originate this change.
This includes modifying urban environments and
orchestrating a behavioural change from a young age
through increased opportunities for these more environmentally 
sustainable modes such as walking, cycling
and public transport. Due to the signi<U+FB01>cant number of
car trips among families with children, the abatement
potential from child centred sustainable travel policy
and plans is likely to be substantial. Though the technological 
improvements in the vehicle <U+FB02>eet are promising,
the fast growth in the popularity of 4WDs and SUVs
amongst Australians, particularly households with children 
(Raimond 2005) indicates a slow progress in reducing 
the transport related carbon emissions.
In the long term any reductions achieved through
technology are likely to be undermined by the ‘child
blind’ policy responses such as urban consolidation
policies to tackle car dependence. As such, in order
to provide a foundation for sustainable travel behaviours, 
it is essential to create precincts where children
can safely explore and use their local environments on
a daily basis and develop environmental awareness
now and into the future that is critical for a sustained
carbon emission reduction.
Policies aiming to create a wider range of meaningful
environments supported by various educational programs 
are needed to address the complex mobility
needs of families with school aged children in order to
achieve sustainable mobility. In this, the approach to
child friendly places should not be fragmented or be
reduced to the provision of prescriptive play spaces.
Rather it should be through an integrated approach aiming
to provide a full range of child friendly streets and
public places (Wright et al. 2017) which generate opportunities 
for sustainable modes of transport and play for
children (O’Brien 2003; Tranter 2016). Recognising
the symbiotic relationship between the goals of child
friendly cities and sustainable cities (Malone 2001,
2007, 2015; Tranter and Pawson 2001) will provide an
important basis for e<U+FB00>ective and equitable sustainable
mobility policies. Australian planning and mobility polcies 
have much to gain from a greater attention to children’s 
mobility needs and rights and their distinguished
capacity to arrest these critical trends.