Children's everyday freedoms: Local government policies on children and                                                                             
sustainable mobility in two Australian states

abstract
While the signi<U+FB01>cant contribution of transport in greenhouse gas emissions is well researched, the pivotal role
that children's transport plays in these trends is not fully understood. This paper assesses the potential of integrating 
the hitherto separate literature and policy bodies of sustainable travel planning with that of child
friendly cities, in order to better inform policy development. Based on a review of literature on child friendly
cities and sustainable travel, we have developed a new operational framework for child centred sustainable
travel policies. The framework measures consideration given to sustainable travel in children's policies and
promotion of children and young people's needs and rights in sustainable travel policies from the point of view of
children as equal citizens. We then review 25 child friendly policy and guidelines and 19 sustainable travel
policies from Australian local governments, using this framework. This policy review <U+FB01>nds limited integration
between policies on child and youth friendliness and sustainable mobility, despite the recognition of the reduced
rates of active travel amongst children.

1. Introduction                                                                       
											
A large and growing body of literature has investigated the relationship between 
sustainability and mobility. The inherent link between urbanization 
and transport technologies including mass car                      
production has been widely discussed. This combined with cheap oil                    
has a<U+FB00>orded increased mobility which, in turn, has resulted in the development 
of unprecedented urban sprawl in cities across the world,                  
particularly in a<U+FB04>uent societies (Newman et al., 2009; Sharpe and                     
Tranter, 2010).                                                                       
Despite the increasing knowledge regarding the role of location,                 
built environment and the provision of social and physical infrastructure 
on carbon intensive travel patterns, the contribution of children's 
transport in these trends has received limited attention. Research             
on children and their environments generally focus on the link between                
the growing trend of children's sedentary lifestyles and increased time                   
spent in micro environments. In many of these interdisciplinary studies,              
the associated health issues such as obesity, diabetes and various cardiovascular 
diseases have been highlighted (Epstein et al., 2012; Giles-Corti 
et al., 2014; Rahman et al., 2011; Sallis et al., 2012; Villanueva                  
et al., 2013). While a few scholars, notably Paul Tranter have discussed                  
the link between child friendly cities and sustainable cities (Malone and                     
Tranter, 2003; Tranter and Pawson, 2001; Tranter and Sharpe, 2008),                           

children's right to sustainable travel is not commonly considered in
transport planning discourse, despite the fact that children are future
environmental decision-makers.
This article calls for the integration of mobility related sustainability
policies with child and youth friendly policies for two main reasons.
Firstly, the increasing use of private cars to transport children (due to
the contemporary lifestyles imposed upon them and associated environmental 
issues) requires greater attention in order to facilitate
better informed policy making. Secondly, it is critically important to
recognize the capacity of children and young people to be active citizens 
(Cook et al., 2015; Fusco et al., 2012; Horelli, 2007), change
agents (Heft and Chawla, 2006; Malone, 2013; Malone, 2015) and indicators 
for successful cities (Enrique Penalosa quoted in Tranter and
Sharpe, 2012) in order to achieve sustainable neighborhoods now and
also to secure the changes needed for a sustainable future.
More speci<U+FB01>cally, this paper aims to answer the following research
questions:

1) What is the degree of integration between policies relating to child
friendly cities and policies relating to sustainable travel?

a) What consideration is given to children's mobility needs and
rights and sustainable travel in the child friendly cities policies of
Australian local governments?

b) What consideration is given to children's mobility needs and
rights in Australian local government sustainable mobility policies?

Policies for child and youth friendly cities, along with sustainable
travel plans and strategies across local governments in Victoria and
South Australia (SA), are reviewed (using the HyperResearch 3.7.3
software). Local government areas were selected based on the presence
of child friendly initiatives. For Victoria, all of the urban municipalities
who were signatories to the Victorian Child friendly Cities and
Communities Network are included (12 councils). In South Australia,
councils that are part of the Child Friendly SA initiative are included (3
councils). This list represents a wide diversity of socio-economic and
spatial characteristics according to the Australian Population and
Housing Census in 2016.
First, the purpose and objectives of 25 Australian local government
child friendly policy and guidelines in the context of consideration
given to sustainable travel are examined. Second, 19 policies in relation
to sustainable travel are reviewed in the context of their recognition
and promotion of children and young people's role and needs and rights
in these spaces from the point of view of children as equal citizens and
change agents. The full list of policies reviewed is included in Appendix
1.

2. De<U+FB01>ning child and youth friendly precincts

The term ‘child friendly’ has been used to refer to the UNICEF Child
Friendly Cities Initiative that is the embodiment of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child (CRC) that was developed in 1989 (UNICEF, 1989).
This de<U+FB01>nition asserts that a child friendly city is actively engaged in
ful<U+FB01>lling the right of every young citizen (under the age of 18) to a wide
range of standards, including their participatory rights in their communities 
as equal citizens, their rights to be safe and protected from
harm and their rights to have environments supporting their needs to
learn, play and be social (UNICEF, 2013).
Despite the fact that the term ‘child friendly’ is frequently referred
to in the policy and research literature, ‘child friendly’ is still a concept
di<U+FB03>cult to de<U+FB01>ne precisely. Firstly, the age range covered with the term
varies across the literature. Although the Convention on the Rights of
Children de<U+FB01>nes a child as any human under the age of eighteen, in the
literature the term commonly represents pre-schoolers and primary
school aged children (0–12 years). Throughout this article, we use the
term ‘child friendly’ to cover all children and young people aged from 0
to 18 years, including plans for young people aged 12–18. In addition,
we use the term ‘youth friendly’ to refer to local government youth
plans that target the age group of 19–25 years.
The multidimensional nature of child friendliness has been discussed 
by several scholars and academics. The UNESCO initiated project 
Growing Up in an Urbanising World, lists both the positive and negative 
indicators for ‘child based environmental quality’ (Chawla,
2002). In relation to neighbourhood environment, the positive indicators 
such as ‘safety and free movement’, ‘peer gathering places’,
‘varied activity settings’ and ‘safe green spaces’ all directly relate children's
mobility to their local environments. In contrast, ‘heavy tra<U+FB03>c’,
‘lack of gathering places’ and ‘varied activity settings’ indicate low
environmental quality for children. ‘Social integration’ and ‘cohesive
community identity’ are also closely associated with children's non-motorised 
mobility whereas ‘social exclusion’ can be experienced by
children who mostly travel by car as a result of loss of opportunities for
social interaction (Chawla, 2002, p.229).
Chatterjee (2005, p.9) questions if ‘child friendliness’ is a place or
the experience. She argues that child friendly places require a ‘diverse
range of physical and social settings from the immediate environment
of the child to citywide locations’. She discusses the term of ‘children's
friendship with places’ in the context of ‘a<U+FB00>ordances’ and also emphazises 
the importance of ‘accessibility’ for children. Oktay (2004) also

highlights the importance of ‘hierarchy of public spaces from the front
door to the street, to the public places and out to the countryside’ because 
of the speci<U+FB01>c functions they a<U+FB00>ord and sense of safety and
community they generate (p.33). Similarly, the problems associated
with creating age speci<U+FB01>c places has long been recognized. For example, 
Woolley and Johns (2001) explain that local governments providing 
a skate park could result in outlawing skateboarding in the other
places of the city. It was argued that play is not separated from the <U+FB02>ow
of everyday life and it is important to embed playfulness in children's
everyday places (Christensen et al., 2017, p. 154). The spatial and
temporal containment of play in playgrounds or skate parks, counteract
with these notions.
More recently the importance of equal and a<U+FB00>ordable access to
sustainable mobility for all has been included in the UN New Urban
Agenda (article 34). Providing services in a wide range of areas including 
sustainable mobility that are responsive to the rights and needs
of children and youth has been a<U+FB03>rmed (United Nations, 2017).

3. Situating children in sustainable mobility discourses

The term ‘sustainable travel’ is often used interchangeably with the
terms ‘sustainable transport’ and ‘active travel/transport’. The term
encompasses the activities of walking, cycling and usage of public
transport. Given the widening presence of ‘scootering’ and ‘skating’
particularly amongst children, the de<U+FB01>nition of ‘sustainable travel’ can
also be broadened to include these activities. Throughout this article we
use the term ‘sustainable travel’ to refer to walking, cycling, scootering,
skateboarding and public transport as opposed to ‘active transport’
which tends to be a dichotomous term to imply that public transport is a
non-active mode (Easton and Ferrari, 2015).
The ‘journey to work’ is the focus of much of the current literature
pertaining to sustainable travel. In the Australian context, this is particularly 
evident in the dissemination of o<U+FB03>cial statistics. Apart from
infrequent household surveys, the travel patterns of children, or the
parents' journeys accompanying their children to school, do not appear
in these statistics.
Historically, since the 1987 Brundtland Report (WCED, 1987) which
de<U+FB01>ned sustainable development as a ‘development that meets the
needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs’, numerous studies have focused on
the impact of climate change on children. Central to these studies was
the fact that children, particularly in developing countries, would be
most a<U+FB00>ected by environmental decline. It has also been recognized
that children are at the centre of this de<U+FB01>nition by the UN not only as
‘future generations’ but as the ‘change agents’ and key stakeholders in
moving towards sustainability (Chawla, 2009; UNICEF, 2015; Malone,
2013; Tranter and Malone, 2008).
The importance of ‘habitual learning’ (O'Brien et al., 2000; Tranter
and Pawson, 2001; Lehner-Lierz, 2003) in earlier ages has been stressed
in some studies and also by the United Nations. For example, in its
‘children on the front line’ document (2015, p.76), UNICEF state that
‘sustainable thinking from a young age onwards is more likely to have a
lasting e<U+FB00>ect than trying to modify already ingrained habits later in
life’. Similarly, the habitual nature of travel behaviours and the di<U+FB03>culty 
surrounding overcoming this path dependence is widely acknowledged 
(Tranter and Pawson, 2001; Chatterton et al., 2015;
Thynell and Wolmar, 2014; Schwanen et al., 2012).

4. Towards a co-bene<U+FB01>ts approach: Child and youth friendly - and
sustainable

Both ‘sustainable travel’ and ‘child friendly cities’ have recently
been the focus of large body of research and practice. Due to the fast
paced urbanization and increased social, economic and environmental
pressure on our cities, car dependence is likely to remain as the focus of
urban research in the coming decades. Likewise, the health and welfare



related issues of contemporary childhood imposed by fast changing                            
natural, social and built environment conditions are likely to remain on                     
the research agenda. According to UNICEF (2015), as many as 60% of                           
all urban dwellers globally will be under the age of 18 by 2030. In light                    
of such an inseparable connection between children and urban life, the                       
separation in the existing accounts of ‘sustainable travel’ and ‘child                       
friendly cities’ on common issues of environmental and social sustainability 
is problematic. The policies to transform our cities towards more                    
sustainable, inclusive and resilient cities can gain much through utilizing 
the experiences of their young citizens.                                                   
It is now well established from a range of studies that certain modes                    
of travel have particular advantages for children. Typically, these                          
modes, which include active transport and public transport, have certain 
features which assist children with the development of their social,                    
emotional and physical wellbeing. Tranter (2016) lists three reasons                         
why active and public transport can be considered as child friendly:                         
‘children prefer them, children can use them independently and when
adults use them this does not make the city less child friendly’ (p.232).


													
Similarly, Gill (2008) refers to walking, cycling and public transport as
child friendly modes. Non-motorised travel modes also provide unique												
opportunities for physical activity, active play, social interaction and
social capital, environmental awareness and contact with nature											
(Gilbert et al., 2017; Schranz et al., 2014; Giles-Corti et al., 2010;											
Mackett and Paskins, 2008; Gill, 2008; Mitchell et al., 2007), as opposed 
to passively sitting in a car where the surrounding environment is											
perceived as a backdrop.											
The social, emotional and mental problems associated with the loss											
of play opportunities in the highly organised and supervised lifestyles of											
today's children have also been highlighted by various researchers.											
These researchers articulate the prevalence of a loss of excitement and											
essential life skills such as con<U+FB01>dence, creativity, negotiation and sense											
of belonging due to parents removing exposure to various risks in											
children's lives (Gray, 2013; Gill, 2008; Hillman, 2006; O'Brien, 2003).											
As previously stated in Section 2, children's rights to have local environments 
supporting their needs to learn, play and be social has been											
recognized (UNICEF, 2013; Whitzman, Worthington & Mizrachi, 2010).											
Restricting children's mobility by the predominance of car use counteracts 
these basic rights. By contrast, active transport and public											
transport create numerous opportunities to exercise these rights.											
The speed of cars is also an important theme both in relation to child											
friendliness and sustainable mobility. The slow movement of cars has											
been listed as a feature of sustainable mobility by Banister (2008) and												
various studies have a<U+FB03>rmed the association of slow car speeds with												
children's free movement in their local environments (Wright et al.,												
2017; Warner & Rukus, 2014; van Loon, Nettelfold and Naylor, 2014).												
In many European cities, this was acknowledged by the implementation												
of speed limits for cars at 30 km/h or less (i.e. at walking speed) (Wright												
et al., 2017; Hickman et al., 2013; Creutzig et al., 2012; Pucher and											
Buehler, 2010).												
In the absence of a single de<U+FB01>nition, we have developed an operational 
framework of child friendly precincts in relation to child friendly											
environments and sustainable mobility based on the literature review											
undertaken (Table 1). This operational framework is a theoretical

proposition, particularly in identifying the conditions of child friendliness 
in the built environment in the context of sustainable travel as
single methodology. More broadly, this framework would be useful for
local and state governments to streamline the assessment of child
friendliness in their sustainable travel policies, as it directly links the
quanti<U+FB01>able built environment variables to child friendliness. It o<U+FB00>ers a
set of built environment design variables within <U+FB01>ve domains of land
use/built environment, provision of nature, local accessibility and
mobility, provision of services and semi-public third places.
To sum up, the proposed framework embodies a multitude of factors
which are recognized as key concepts in creating sustainable and child
friendly precincts such as accessibility and a<U+FB00>ordances of public places,
a wide range of activity areas, integration of land use and transport
with children in mind. With this, we argue that child friendliness can,
and should, be integrated into mainstream planning and transport policies, 
particularly those with a sustainable travel focus.

5. Policy review

5.1. Demography of the case study areas

Comparatively speaking, Australia has limited local government
capacity to a<U+FB00>ect social and environmental change (Sellers and
Lidström, 2007). For example, in terms of the total number of Australian 
public employees, the share of local governments in 2017 was
9.7% compared to 78.1% for state governments and 12.3% for the
Commonwealth Government (ABS, 2017).

Most major metropolises, with the exception of Brisbane, have
dozens of local governments, generally with populations below
100,000. In this case study, the majority of the councils selected had
relatively large populations (Table 2). Only 3 out of 15 councils had a
total population below 100,000 people. Amongst the selected local
government areas, the City of Melton (VIC), an outer ring area with
mixed socio-economic status (SES) had the highest proportion of children 
and young people with 31.2% of the population aged 0 to 19 years.
It was followed by another outer ring local government area with mixed
SES, the City of Whittlesea (VIC) with 27.3% of the population aged 0 to
19 years. The location of each council area was given in Figs. 2–4.
The local government area with the lowest proportion of 0–19 years
olds (14.5%) was the wealthy, inner city Victorian council, the City of
Port Phillip. The proportion of this age group varied between 20% to
26% across other local government areas which were similar to the
metropolitan Melbourne and Adelaide values of 24.3% and 23.6% respectively. 
With the exception of the City of Boroondara (VIC) which
had the highest proportion of people aged 15–19 years, the 0–19 age
group cohort was most likely to be concentrated in the low socio-economic, 
outer ring or regional local government areas.
In terms of the school density for each council area (number of
schools per sq. km), the City of Boroondara (VIC) had the highest school
density (0.97 schools/sq. km) followed by the City of Port Phillip (VIC).
The regional and outer council areas including Ballarat (0.02 schools/
sq. km), Greater Bendigo (0.06 schools/sq. km) and the City of Melton
(0.06 schools/sq. km) in Victoria had the lowest school density. Though												

the school catchment areas vary (by school type and individual schools
policies) and extend beyond the respective council areas, the school
density measurement is indicative of the size of catchment areas and
potential trip lengths as well as the increased choice of local schools for
the residents in those areas. That is, higher school density indicate
smaller catchment areas and higher number of school choices and high
likelihood of attending a local school.
The size of council resources varied widely across the chosen local
government areas. The number of council sta<U+FB00> per 1000 residents was
the highest for the City of Port Phillip, Moonee Valley City Council, the
City of Ballarat and Maribyrnong City Council (Table 2). The number of
council sta<U+FB00> per 1000 residents aged 0 to 19 years was particularly high
for the City of Port Phillip which had the lowest proportion of this age
group (48.2 sta<U+FB00> per 1000 residents aged 0–19) (Fig. 1).
The housing density varied signi<U+FB01>cantly amongst the councils reviewed. 
The City of Port Phillip displayed the highest housing density
followed by other inner city or middle ring councils.
As mentioned previously, the travel patterns of children are not
included in the o<U+FB03>cial statistics in Australia to determine the level of
car dependence amongst families with children. However, the journey
to work data (travel to work by car as a driver) is a good proxy indicator
of general car dependence for each local area. The local governments
situated in the outer metropolitan or regional areas with lower socioeconomics 
exhibited high car dependence rates.

5.2. How do cities approach child and youth friendliness?

The majority of councils reviewed have children's plans which targeted 
the age group of 0–12 years (e.g. City of Greater Dandenong,
2015a; City of Whitehorse, 2014a) and a youth plan for the age group of
12–25 years (e.g. City of Whitehorse, 2014b; Town of Gawler, 2013) or
10-25 years (City of Onkaparinga, 2013). Some of the councils, including 
the City of Greater Bendigo and the City of Boroondara had
plans to cover all children and young people from birth to age of 25.
The City of Port Phillip was the only council with the separate plans and
strategies targeting three di<U+FB00>erent age groups in recognition of di<U+FB00>erent
needs of di<U+FB00>erent age groups, namely 0–8, 8–11 and 12–25. For Maribyrnong 
City Council, there were no children or youth plans available
at the time of writing of this paper.
The majority of children and young people's plans were developed

ber of council sta<U+FB00> per 1000 residents aged 0–19.
for a period of 4–5 years. In terms of what child and youth friendly
plans draw upon, state and federal government as well as international
guidelines were commonly utilized as the founding principles of these
plans. The state and federal government directions in relation to children's 
development were the basis of the majority of these plans.
Brimbank City Council (2015a; 2015b), Moonee Valley City Council
(2014; 2015; 2016), the City of Boroondara, 2015 in Victoria, and the
City of Campbelltown (2015a; 2015b) in SA speci<U+FB01>cally referred to UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child as part of their guiding principles.
In addition, community consultation comprising surveys with children 
and young people along with parents and various service providers
informed the development of many of these plans. During the consultation 
process, children were asked to report on the key issues concerning 
them along with the activities they enjoy in their respective
council areas.
In relation to the main objectives and actions of child and youth
friendly plans and guidelines, broad statements such as ‘improving the
health and wellbeing of children and their families’ were frequently
used. A few councils included highly detailed actions including location
speci<U+FB01>c ones. Moreland City Council provides a good example of the
practice of strong advocacy with state governments for better infrastructure 
for children. Under the theme of children related infrastructure, 
the action list includes the following: ‘Council will advocate
for increased investment by the Commonwealth and State Governments
in publicly provided children's services’:

i. Investment in new early years facilities at the community hub in
development at the former Glenroy Primary School is the main
priority.

ii. Provision of new facilities – including a primary school – to meet
projected demand in Brunswick and East Brunswick is a ‘medium
term priority’ (p. 14, Moreland City Council, 2016).–


5.3. Do child friendly initiatives recognize children's role in sustainable
mobility?

In total, ‘health’ and ‘education’ were the main policy issues across
all children's and young people's plans reviewed. More speci<U+FB01>cally,
‘health’ and ‘wellbeing’ were used 1932 times in total, making it the
fourth most frequently used word amongst all words (Table 3). It

appears that councils with a high proportion of children aged 0 to
19 years, particularly those situated in regional or outer metropolitan
areas (e.g. City of Ballarat, 2015; City of Greater Bendigo, 2015b; City
of Melton, 2014a; 2014b; City of Whittlesea, 2013) were more likely to
prioritise health and education than their counterparts in inner and
middle city areas. Health and wellbeing was also emphasized by the
City of Boroondara which had the highest school density and the
highest proportion of children amongst the inner-city councils.
Though most councils referred to where children and youth plans sit
in their broader policy environment, 6 out of 14 councils (namely the
Moreland City Council, 2016, the City of Greater Bendigo, 2011, 2015b;
2015c the Moonee Valley City Council, 2015; 2016, the City of Melton,
2014a; 2014b, the City of Port Phillip, 2012; 2014a; 2014b; 2014c and
the City of Whittlesea 2013) speci<U+FB01>cally claimed these policies to be
guiding frameworks for various other policies rather than a standalone
policy. These plans included signi<U+FB01>cant detail on how children and

youth plans would inform the other activities of Councils.
These councils were also more likely to provide details and speci<U+FB01>c
goals for addressing children's and young people's mobility needs.
Amongst these councils, active transport to/from school for primary
school aged children was frequently mentioned, while public transport
had more weight in youth plans.
Although 18 out of 25 plans reviewed (by 12 out of 14 councils)
referred to children's mobility and active transport and some highlighted 
the precipitous decline in the rates of active transport to school,
the context in which they were mentioned was rather broad (Table 4).
There were 8 plans and strategies (out of 25) that recognized children's
mobility needs in more speci<U+FB01>c terms. For the majority of these (5 out
of 8), the primary focus was on the journey to school, particularly for
the Early Years Plans. The Moonee Valley City Council (2014), the City
of City of Greater Bendigo, 2017 and the City of Port Phillip (2012)
provide examples of plans with greater detail on the importance of

children's mobility and how they could be improved. However, by and
large, these policies all include broad strategic objectives rather than
easily measurable local environment variables. For example, the
Moonee Valley City Council's Early Years Plan 2014–2022 (p. 9) includes 
the following strategic objectives:
Generate child-friendly neighborhoods and public spaces that encourage 
active and independent children

2.1 Advocate and generate a child friendly and intergenerational response 
to urban design and the natural and built environment.
2.2 Progress the Complete Street principles to rethink, reprioritise and
reorder streets to encourage public transport, safe walking and
cycling.
2.3 Identify opportunities to activate public space that supports children's 
creativity, independence and the freedom to safely explore.

The City of Greater Bendigo's State of Children's Report (City of
Greater Bendigo, 2011) and the City of Port Phillip's Happy, Healthy and
Heard: Youth Commitment Plan (City of Port Phillip, 2014b) also shows
high regard for children's and young people's independent mobility and
the importance of independent access to various public places. This was
in line with the de<U+FB01>nition of child and youth friendliness articulated by
Chawla (2002) and Chatterjee (2005) and the operational framework
we proposed (Table 1). For example, the City of Greater Bendigo's State
of Children's Report makes speci<U+FB01>c references (and provided details) to
child speci<U+FB01>c atlases and interactive mapping tools within their plans.
Children's favorite places within the community are also highly recognized 
by this policy.
Similarly, the City of Port Phillip's Youth Commitment Plan
2014–2019 (City of Port Phillip, 2014c) provides a detailed action plan
on ‘creating physical infrastructure that provides young people opportunities 
to have fun, connect socially with their peers, learn and get

involved with their community and/or access support services’ (p. 7).
In terms of the in<U+FB02>uence of car tra<U+FB03>c and speed limits on children's
movements, only the Children and Young People's Strategy by the City of
Boroondara, 2015 speci<U+FB01>cally refers to this issue. It recognizes that
speed limits around built up areas and schools create safety issues for
children. The plan lists an action item to ‘improve community safety by
continuing to advocate for the introduction of 40 km/h speed limits in
identi<U+FB01>ed shopping strips’ (p.77).
Objectives related to the improvement of public transport were recognized 
within 11 out of 25 plans and strategies. The majority of these
plans were Middle Years or Youth Plans (7 out of 11). Some of these
plans also refer to social isolation within the public transport poor
areas. This issue was also highlighted during the consultation with
young people prior to the development of various youth plans such as
the importance of young people without a driving licence to get around
independently (Moonee Valley City Council's Strategy for Young

People).                                                                                       
Many councils whose plans were reviewed also have standalone                               
web pages in relation to resources on active transport to school. Some                         
councils with high proportions of children such as the City of Melton                          
and the City of Boroondara have dedicated Active Transport O<U+FB03>cers                              
working with schools and various service providers.                                            
												
5.4. How do cities approach sustainable mobility?                                              
												
An Integrated Transport Strategy was the most common form of                               
policy dealing with sustainable transport (e.g. City of Boroondara,                                
2006; City of Melton, 2015; Moonee Valley City Council, 2008). There                           
were 7 councils with speci<U+FB01>c walking and cycling strategies (Brimbank                          
City Council, 2016a; City of Ballarat, 2017b; City of Campbelltown,                            
2007; City of Greater Dandenong, 2015b; 2017b; City of Port Phillip,                           
2011a; City of Whitehorse, 2016; City of Whittlesea, 2016). Four of                            
them had these plans in addition to their broader integrated transport                         
strategies (City of Port Phillip, 2011a; 2011b; Maribyrnong City                               
Council, 2014a; 2014b; City of Whitehorse, 2011; 2016; Brimbank City                           
Council, 2016a; 2016b). For Gawler (SA), the topic of sustainable                              
transport is included in their Environmental Management Plan (Town of                          
Gawler, 2016). The timeframe for these transport strategies varied between 
4 and 10 years. The Onkaparinga Council (SA) did not have any                            
transport plans accessible to public at the time of writing this report.                       
In terms of the structure of these integrated transport strategies, the
most commonly used themes were walking/cycling, public transport,                                  
roads/car parking and land use. Most of these were informed by Council                         
Plans, with an aim to sustainably address the transport needs of their                         
growing cities.                                                                                
In terms of urban design related actions for delivering sustainable                            
transport outcomes, there were varying levels of detail in each plan.                          
Most plans use broad terms such as ‘encourage cycling’, ‘promote active                        
transport to/from schools’ and ‘identify and implement best design                             
practice for cyclists and pedestrians’. Some of these plans refer to separate 
urban design frameworks for the implementation of urban design 
principles promoting sustainable transport.                                               
In total, there were 6 out of 19 plans which used some speci<U+FB01>c urban                       
design principles in relation to sustainable transport. Most of these (4)                          
were speci<U+FB01>c walking and cycling plans as opposed to the integrated                            
transport and land use plans (2).                                                              
The City of Whittlesea's Bicycle Plan 2016–2020 was amongst the                            

few policies with a content closest to the built environment variables
we displayed in Table 1. As such, it comprises various sustainable
transport related objectives followed by detailed, location-based action
plans. For example, under the objective of ‘better recreation trails’,
three problem areas are identi<U+FB01>ed: ‘gaps and missing links’, ‘poor
quality surfaces’ and ‘inadequate lighting’. These are followed by detailed, 
location-based actions along with the relevant partners and the
priority ranking: ‘build/upgrade major recreation trails to a suitable all-weather 
surface, particularly Darebin Creek Trail (Metropolitan Ring
Road to Findon Road)’ (p. 31).
The recognition of skateboarding and scootering was not apparent
across the sustainable transport strategies reviewed. In total, the terms
related to skateboarding and scootering were used 18 and 13 times
respectively, by all plans and strategies reviewed. Most of the time, the
context for the skateboarding was in the form of an improvement to a
speci<U+FB01>c skate park location as opposed to the consideration given to the
needs of skateboarders throughout the city in the given policy. The term
‘scootering’ was frequently used in the context of ‘mobility scooters’ for
people with special needs and in one occasion it was used in a negative
form e.g. walking issues created by cyclists and scooters through the
misuse of footpaths.

5.5. Do sustainable mobility policies refer to children and young people and
their (speci<U+FB01>c) mobility needs and car dependence?

Out of 19 plans and strategies reviewed, there were 14 plans with
references to children's sustainable travel patterns. However, most were
in a broad context and usually in the form of recent trends of reduced
walking and cycling rates to and from schools.
There were fewer references to ‘young people’ than ‘children’ across
the sustainable policies reviewed. In total, the term ‘child/children’ was
referenced 209 times while ‘youth, the young, young people’ were used
48 times (Table 5). Similarly, there were more references to ‘primary
schools’ compared to ‘secondary schools’ (53 and 23 times respectively). 
Most of these councils also used the term ‘family/families’ in
association with preschoolers or primary school aged children e.g. families 
with young children.
It appeared that councils with less car dependence such as the City
of Port Phillip, Maribyrnong City Council and the City of Boroondara
were more likely to recognize families with children compared to the
councils with higher car dependence. However, the presence of higher


SES and a greater availability of resources (high ratios of sta<U+FB00>/residents) 
within these councils is likely to be more relevant than the
location and the extent of car dependence.
In fact, socio-economic characters of the local government areas
seemed to be indicative of the reference to children, particularly in the
context of the journey to school. As such, councils with higher SES were
more likely to refer to school related travel patterns in their plans.
There was no apparent relationship between the proportion of children
and young people and the recognition of children and young people in
these councils' sustainable travel plans however there was a relationship 
between increased recognition of children in these plans and
higher school densities.
The context in which young people were most commonly mentioned
was regarding the lack of car ownership. Many policies refer to the
presence of social disadvantage and limited mobility due to not owning
a car for the young and elderly under the section of equity and social
inclusion. A few plans such as the City of Greater Bendigo's Connecting
Greater Bendigo Integrated Transport and Land Use Strategy, elaborate on
this by linking this statement to their public transport related objectives: 
‘Many in the community do not drive private cars: young people,
elderly people, those unable to drive or without the <U+FB01>nancial means to
run a car. They are disadvantaged by developments which create a
reliance on private vehicles. Providing equity and inclusion means
ensuring everyone can access transport that is relevant to their needs
and circumstances’ (p. 22).
In terms of children's mobility needs in relation to the access to a
range of environments as opposed to just schools as we emphasized in
the new operational framework, the City of Greater Bendigo's Integrated
Transport and Land Use Strategy is a good example. This plan regards
children's active transport to various community places highly and includes 
information on various child friendly spatial tools adopted by
Council, such as Community Compass.
Similarly, the Moreland City Council's Integrated Transport Strategy
2010–2019 comprises a detailed action plan to promote active transport
(walking and cycling) amongst children, particularly through primary
schools. Their plan includes a trial to introduce tighter parking restrictions 
within the immediate school vicinities (Moreland City
Council, 2010).
The impact of car speed on the safety of pedestrians and cyclists has
been emphasized by nearly all of the sustainable travel plans. In terms
of speed limit reductions to promote sustainable mobility, 40 km/h is
the most commonly recommended speed limit in their action plans.
Though three plans refer to the European practice of 30 km/h speed
limits in urban areas, only Maribyrnong Integrated Sustainable Strategy
includes an action to adopt this speed limit:
‘In the vicinity of schools and through activity precincts advocate for
part-time 30 km/h speed limits’ (p. 42).
The City of Ballarat's Cycling Action Plan (City of Ballarat, 2017b)
also refers to an assessment matrix to be used for cycling related projects 
with a speci<U+FB01>c question on children's cycling: ‘Does the project
encourage people to ride their bike more? Project must encourage
people of all ages and abilities to ride more often. This includes catering
for children and groups that are less mobile, such as the elderly’ (p. 23).
In terms of the policy context and how these sustainable transport
strategies interacted with other council plans, there were only three
plans that speci<U+FB01>cally listed a Children's Plan within the list of other
relevant policies. These councils include the City of Port Phillip (2011b)
(Sustainable Transport Strategy), the City of Greater Dandenong, 2017b
(Cycling Strategy) and the City of Whitehorse (2016) (Cycling
Strategy).
Those plans that refer to children's journey to school and a high
reliance on private cars tend to focus on the health and tra<U+FB03>c issues
associated with these trends. Maribyrnong's Integrated Transport Strategy
seems to be the only plan which explicitly recognizes the capacity of
schools and children in creating and sustaining the behavior change

towards sustainable travels:

‘School travel plans are a structured approach to creating a culture
of walking and cycling at a neighbourhood level - supported by local
infrastructure improvements. As with all travel planning, school
travel plans follow a set process designed to gain early and sustained
stakeholder acceptance and support and develop clear policies and
programs to induce behaviour change. The City of Maribyrnong can
use school travel plans not only to bring about immediate behaviour
change amongst the target audience of children and their parents,
but also to “lock in” the gains of this behaviour through better local
infrastructure as well as policy changes’ (Maribyrnong City Council,
2014b; p. 112).

5.6. Children's right to sustainable travel: who makes this decision?

In Australia, state governments are responsible for making and
implementing policies in relation to primary and secondary schools,
hospitals, major roads, public transport, public housing, and social
services. The local governments work in partnerships with the state
governments in most of these areas including education, health and
transport. More speci<U+FB01>cally, in accordance with the state government
planning and development law, they are responsible for producing
policies and guidelines and assessing most of the development applications 
in their respective council areas.
Despite being the smallest part of the three-tier government structure, 
it is evident in the policy review that local governments play a
critical role in governing sustainable travel within their council areas as
well as the creation of child and youth friendly environments.
Therefore, it is possible to say that local governments have a responsibility 
to address children and young people's mobility needs in a
sustainable and democratic manner where their voices are included.
However, this policy review reveals a fragmented approach to this issue
and a lack of a clear policy domain as to where and how this is being
addressed, particularly for children older than 12 years.
Within local government child and youth friendly guidelines, the
focus has been primarily on health and education with relative neglect
of children's mobility needs and rights. Similarly, children's sustainable
mobility rights, particularly for those older than 12 years are not explicitly 
recognized and addressed within local government transport
policies.
Though the children and youth plans reviewed widely recognized
children and youth as equal citizens, the explicit recognition of children's 
capacity to be change agents in their societies is not apparent.
There was only one sustainable travel policy that explicitly recognizes
children's and young people's role as change agents towards sustainable
mobility which is Maribyrnong's Integrated Transport Strategy. This
strategy discusses the importance of children being the target audience
through school travel plans to create a behaviour change and develop a
culture of walking and cycling at a neighbourhood level (p.112). To a
degree, the Whitehorse Cycling Strategy 2016 also links the importance of
active transport related activities in early years to sustainable travel
behaviours.
Most of the policies reviewed displayed a clear understanding of the
declining active transport to/from school rates and some of them included 
sets of targets and actions to tackle these trends. While the role
of schools to tackle these trends is clearly important (Easton and
Ferrari, 2015), in the context of child friendly environments, there is a
need for more considerations of the whole urban environment rather
than just the journey to and from school, as we proposed in our operational 
framework above. As such, it is critical to develop clear and
precise policies aiming to create a wider range of environments within
the sustainable transport reach of children. Given that the mobility
needs of primary and secondary aged children di<U+FB00>er greatly (e.g. participation 
in workforce amongst secondary school aged children), limiting 
the focus of these discourses to children aged 0 to 12 years seems

problematic. The City of Port Phillip provides a good example of how
this distinction can be recognized in local policies. Their policy environment 
includes targeted policies for children (birth to 8), middle
years (8–11) and youth (12–25). For example, for children aged 8 to
11 years, they discuss their unique needs that cannot be addressed by
either early years or youth programs (Family, Youth and Children
Strategy 2014–2019, p.4).
Though there were several examples of plans that highlighted the
importance of public places for young people with a wide range of affordances 
e.g. to hang out and socialise (Chawla, 2002; Chatterjee,
2005), a large number of plans consider young people in the context of
limited mobility due to not having a driving licence. This outlook seems
to undermine the importance of young people's right to sustainable
travel and right to choose not to get a driver's licence and a car. Similarly, 
it seems to overlook the importance of integrated activities and
services, not just lack of access to cars, in the transport disadvantage
areas (Currie et al., 2009). This view also implies that young people are
expected to have a car at a later stage of their lives. Many bene<U+FB01>ts can
be gained from reframing this policy position from seeing the lack of car
ownership amongst young people as a disadvantage to becoming an
opportunity to reinforce sustainable travel through targeted investments 
(Delbosc, 2016). In fact the community consultation with young
people (conducted by various local governments as part of the development 
of these policies) echoed their desire for the ability to get
around without a car. For example, consultation with younger children
in Bendigo revealed a strong expression for a more scooter and skateboard 
friendly town.

6. Conclusion

Through this policy review, we found that there is little integration
between Australian local government policies on child and youth
friendliness and sustainable mobility. By and large, the place of children's 
mobility needs and rights in these policy spaces seems to be
limited to the acknowledgement of reduced rates of walking and cycling
to/from school without clearly and consistently de<U+FB01>ned objectives to
address these trends. Moonee Valley City Council's Integrated Transport
Strategy, Maribyrnong City Council's Bicycle Strategy and the City of
Ballarat's Cycling Action Plan are good examples of the inclusion of
detailed design guidelines.
Still, it appears that the promotion of sustainable travel is typically
achieved through several separate planning schemes and guidelines or
set of objectives by local government plans. These principles for sustainable 
travel are usually the sum of broad objectives and desirable
outcomes such as ‘encourage walking, cycling and public transport use’
rather than concrete standards and checklists that consider the needs
and rights of all of their citizens. Similarly, the child and youth
friendliness of a neighbourhood is generally promoted through standalone 
guidelines derived from broad international policies (e.g. UN
Convention of the rights of Children). This approach allows only limited
room for local adaptability and often presents the child friendly context
as an optional, onerous task on top of other planning guidelines
(Whitzman et al., 2009).
The development and the use of the operational framework above
represents a shift from stand-alone objective-based guidelines to a set of
minimum standard-based guidelines. In doing so, the child's needs and
rights are placed in the centre of the policies related to sustainable
mobility. Child friendly cities initiatives should not be seen as a specialised <U+FB01>eld and the responsibility of a few professionals but embedded
in all policies concerning our cities. In the context of the highly complex
policymaking environment and the limited institutional capacity at the
level of Australian local governments, integrating these policy areas
would be highly bene<U+FB01>cial.
Ultimately, this article aims to analyse the connections between the
policies on sustainable travel and child friendly neighborhoods and to
better understand how these connections could be more fully harnessed
and utilized. If transport policies are to tackle car dependence, it is
critical that the role of children, their needs and rights are fully understood 
to ensure that carbon emissions are reduced now, and these
sustainable lifestyles will be carried over to future generations. Given
most of the council areas in this study have relatively large populations,
in order to develop a more comprehensive picture of how child
friendliness and sustainable mobility can be integrated, additional
studies examining the practice in smaller council areas will be needed.
Child-centred sustainable travel policies can provide numerous social 
co-bene<U+FB01>ts through ‘blurring the boundaries between work and
play, child and adult space and nature and culture’ (Whitzman and
Freeman, 2015). Viewing our policies that shape our local environments 
through the lens of children's everyday life and their everyday
freedoms will provide important information on sustainable mobility
and reinforce the intended environmental and social outcomes of these
policies. Likewise, child friendly initiatives will bene<U+FB01>t from a better
integration with sustainable travel policies through gaining wider impact 
in the advocacy of the interest of children of all ages and young
people who seem to be generally marginalised within these policies.
The integration of policy instruments in the <U+FB01>elds of sustainable travel
and child friendly cities has much to o<U+FB00>er in achieving e<U+FB00>ective strategic 
planning and practice and e<U+FB03>cient use of the limited institutional
capacity at the local government level.