Effect of School Quality and Residential
Environment on Mode Choice
of School Trips

Trips to school are increasingly taken in automobiles. Smart growth and
health advocates suggest that a better-designed built environment in
a neighborhood can promote walking and biking to school and that
children’s walking and biking improve the environment, lower obesity,
and increase physical activity. The effects of school variables on travel
behavior, however, have rarely been documented. The objective of this
research is to examine the impact of school location and characteristics on
students’ choice of travel mode. The argument is that if the local school is
good, then a child is more likely to attend it. The chance increases that the
child will commute actively to a school within a short distance, all else
equal. School trips from the 2001 Post Census Regional Household Travel
Survey of the Los Angeles, California, region were analyzed in relation to
school quality in the area of the traveler’s origin (residence) and destination. 
Results revealed that for young travelers who attended kindergarten
to sixth grade, school quality and residential environment had no significant 
effect on nonmotorized modes. In addition, school quality had little
impact on mode choice. Nonetheless, the distance from home to the
nearest high school significantly increased the probability that students
who attended seventh to 12th grades would choose the bus over a private
vehicle. A 10% increase in the distance from home to the nearest high
school raised the probability of taking the bus by 2.86%, while an identical 
increase in residential density increased the probability of walking
or biking by 1.09%.

In the United States, trips to school are being increasingly taken
in automobiles. The percentage of children ages 6 to 12 years who
travel by that mode has increased from 15% in 1969 to 50% in 2001.
The reason for this ever-increasing dependency on cars is the distance
from home to school (1, 2). In 2001, about 75% of children traveled
a mile or more to school, compared with 54.8% in 1969 (3). An outcome 
of increased travel distance and car dependency is that children 
miss an important part of physical exercise outside their
classrooms (4). Walking to school can be an important part of children’s 
daily physical activities and a complementary part of in-school
physical education classes (4). Moreover, it is postulated that children 
who are car dependent may continue this behavior into adulthood, 
thereby limiting their alternative travel modes (4, 5). With
these plausible behavioral consequences, some researchers suggest

that it is important to provide exposure to alternative travel modes
at early ages (4, 6).
To encourage walking or biking to school, transportation and
urban planners have endeavored to create safer and more walkable
neighborhoods, addressing the road and personal safety issues that
concern most parents. Positive results from empirical studies show
that children are more likely to commute actively (i.e., walking or
biking) to school in pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly neighborhoods
(7–9). Nonetheless, such urban form elements, according to recent
literature, have less impact on children’s mode choice than travel
distance (10–13). While travel distance is predetermined in part by
school quality and parental school choice (10), the effects of school
location and characteristics on travel behavior have rarely been
documented (14–16).
The spatial distribution of school quality in the United States is not
homogeneous. In particular, suburban districts are better because they
receive significantly more financial aid from their local governments
than their urban counterparts (17). To level the playing field, several
reforms have been enacted over the past three decades. For example,
in California, both intra- and interdistrict transfers allow students to
apply to schools outside their neighborhoods. This open enrollment
policy provides more choice of schools, especially for those living in
low-performing neighborhoods. Students can apply to schools in districts 
that participate in this choice program. However, seats are not
guaranteed for all applicants if applications exceed capacity, and the
admission will be decided by random drawing, with priority given to
those whose siblings are already enrolled or those whose parents work
in the district. One of the most critical criteria in allowing a transfer is
the difference in school characteristics between the district of residence 
and the accepting district. If a student’s application is denied,
an appeal can be filed when “the student has expressed a genuine
interest in an educational class or program which is both available and
beneficial to the student, which cannot be reasonably provided by the
district of residence, and the student is in fact eligible for, and has
committed to taking or has been accepted into, the desired class or
program” (18).
Whether students eventually exercise the school choice option
often depends on their transportation choices. Since school buses are
provided only within district boundaries, students from other districts 
must make their own way into the district before boarding the
school bus. Therefore, students whose families do not own a car or
whose parents have strict time constraints are likely to be locked in
the neighborhood school, regardless of its quality. Although children 
from low-performing districts may appear to need the school
choice policy most, those who cannot afford a car may not benefit
from this policy.

Much research on school transportation has been conducted to identify 
what factors influence children’s travel-to-school mode choice
and how to incorporate the information into urban design and transportation 
engineering (6, 11, 12, 14, 19–25). Several critical variables
have been identified, including trip distance, sidewalk presence, car
availability, age, number of children in the household (6), parent’s
work schedule (2), and parents’ and children’s perceptions of their
local neighborhoods about traffic density, road safety, and personal
security (26). In the United States, the freedom of movement enabled
by the car culture has led to increased car ownership and to decreased
nonmotorized mode usage, especially when compared with other
countries (27). The effect of car ownership has frequently been found
to be negatively correlated with active commuting to school (11, 14,
28). An inverse association has also been found between active commuting 
and income. Children from higher-income families are less
likely to commute actively (12, 14, 28). With respect to demographics, 
an important factor in explaining travel mode is gender. Male students 
tend to be more likely to conduct their journey on foot or by
bicycle than females (21, 26, 27 ). Ethnicity was tested in a number
of studies as well. Ethnic minorities often exhibit a higher tendency
to commute actively (28).
School location and characteristics have been taken into consideration 
in recent transportation literature on children’s journey to
school (12, 14, 19). By balancing the supply of and demand for
schools, it is possible to reduce long commute distances and increase
active commutes. From these recent studies, two important points
with respect to land use and spatial distribution of schools are
noteworthy. First, the spatial distribution of schools and residents
causes long travel distances and low walking and biking rates. Second, 
one way to shorten the distance and encourage walking and
biking is that existing schools can be improved or more new facilities 
can be built in residential areas (12, 19, 29). When deciding on
a new site, one must consider its catchment area and the number
of students living near the school so that the new location can maximize 
the number of pedestrians and bicyclists. Alternatively,
improving the quality of existing schools can also encourage walking
and biking (12, 19).
McMillan examined which factors affect the probability of walking 
or biking to school (12). Several common factors were tested,
including neighborhood safety, traffic safety, transportation options,
attitudes, sociodemographics, and urban form. Whether the home–
school distance is less than 1 mi turned out to be highly significant.
Children living within 1 mi are three times more likely to walk or bike
than to use a private vehicle. The effect of urban form on children’s
travel behavior is rather modest when distance is controlled.
McDonald suggested that current policies such as Safe Routes to
School, which is a program that encourages more children to walk
and bike through improving safety and reducing traffic in the community, 
may not be enough to change children’s travel behavior,
because it does not change the spatial distribution of schools and residents 
(19). The results from her study showed that travel time has
the strongest effect on walking. McDonald proposed a long-term land
use and school planning policy: a community school (19, 29). This
strategy brings schools closer to residents, which can essentially
decrease trip lengths and increase school accessibility. The author
also discussed a community school’s viability (19). On the one hand,
given an annual budget of billions of dollars for construction of new
school facilities in the case of several states, such as California and
New Jersey, it is possible to build community schools that are located
97
closer to students. On the other hand, a community school is feasible
only in communities with a density greater than 4,000 persons per
square mile, making community schools an impossible choice in
many American neighborhoods. In these areas, McDonald concluded
that retrofitting existing schools in high-density areas will be more
economic than building new community schools (19).
Despite the proposed school and land use planning strategies,
there are actually very limited empirics to buttress the possible
relationship between school characteristics and travel behavior
(14–16). Ewing et al. tested the effects of school location on mode
choice from 709 trips of students attending a kindergarten to grade
12 school in Gainesville, Florida (14). Adding to the socioeconomic 
and built environment variables, they included two school
variables, enrollment and whether it is a high school (dummy variable), 
in a multinomial logit model to predict mode choice. They
tested the hypothesis that a larger school enrollment will draw students 
from a larger catchment area, which might decrease the likelihood 
of walking or biking. The school variables, however, turned
out to be insignificant in all model specifications when controlling
for travel time. Nonetheless, the authors still suspected that the variable 
of school size could affect mode choice beyond its effect on
travel time. Land use variables did not prove significant either. The
authors explained that school trips, which are mandatory, may not
be sensitive to the walking environment as much as discretionary
trips are.
Wilson et al. tested another attribute—school type—and found a
negative association of magnet schools with active commuting in
St. Paul, Minnesota (15). Compared with neighborhood schools,
magnet schools drew students from a larger geographic area, which
resulted in longer commute distances and reduced the likelihood
of walking and biking. They expanded this research and surveyed
parents of elementary school students in St. Paul and Roseville,
Minnesota (16). The survey measured students’ commute modes,
routes, parental attitudes toward school choice, and their available
transportation options. This survey confirmed the earlier results that
students who attended magnet schools traveled longer distances and
had higher busing rates than nonmotorized and auto rates (15). Parents 
of nonwhite and magnet school students in particular were more
concerned about school bus service. In addition, the survey reported
parents’ attitudes toward travel modes, revealing that the lower active
commuting rates were primarily due to the long distances, as indicated
by 66% of the sample.
Sirard and Slater reviewed more than 100 papers on active commuting 
and suggested the need to examine school variables (27 ).
Using the ecological and cognitive active commuting framework,
which was built on several previous frameworks by experts in urban
planning, transportation, and physical activity, they summarized
most variables used in the related literature. These variables were
categorized into three groups: policy level, neighborhood level, and
parent–family level. While most variables fell into the latter two categories, 
few variables had been identified in the policy category. Only
four variables have been tested: construction date, size, physical education 
class during the week, and whether a school discourages walking 
to school. Policy factors, however, can cause changes in people’s
travel behavior. One of the authors’ examples was that an expanded
school choice program coincided with a 20% increase in travel distance 
according to the 2005 U.K. National Travel Survey. The review
by Sirard and Slater suggested that other policy-level variables (i.e.,
school busing policies, school choice, and school locations) as well
as their interactions with neighborhood and parent- and family-level
variables need to be further examined (27).

SCHOOL LOCATION CONSTRAINT
One method that may be useful in identifying factors that influence
travelers in specific types of trips is categorizing school trips as mandatory 
trips and separating them from discretionary trips (14). What sets
school trips apart from children’s general trips is the additional constraint 
on school location. In other words, children’s travel distance
and time are conditional on the location and business hours of the
school authority. Unfortunately, the important element of spatial
opportunity distribution is often left out in mode choice analysis.
To comprehend children’s travel behavior, it is important to identify 
children and their parents’ preferences for schools and the constraints 
on school choices they face in their residential neighborhoods.
It is known that school quality and land value are not distributed
homogeneously across space. High-performing schools are often
associated with high land values. The price of land in good school districts 
is often bid up by households with a high willingness to pay for
education and certain financial affordability. The extra land price for
school quality that parents need to pay is school premiums (30–32).
The higher the premiums, the less affordable public education is. High
premiums attached to a good school district may result in long-distance 
interdistrict travel for students who reside in low-performing
yet more affordable districts. The same rationale can be applied to
intradistrict school trips: within a district, house prices in neighborhoods 
with better schools are usually higher, causing long commutes
for students coming from less expensive neighborhoods. Given that
intradistrict and interdistrict transfers are permitted in California,
students may benefit from the open enrollment programs, contingent
on the enrollment policy and capacity of the accepting schools and
students’ willingness to commute.
The large number of vehicle school trips calls for an understanding
of children’s car dependency in terms of specific constraints. This
paper investigates the impact of school location and characteristics on
students’ mode choice by using a spatial opportunity variable—the
quality of the nearest school for each census tract. The objective is to
examine the relationship between school quality and mode choice.
Walking and biking are expected to be positively related to students’
residential school quality. The higher the residential school quality,
the shorter the travel distance, and thus the higher is the probability
of walking or biking, all else equal.

METHODOLOGY

Data

The following two data sources were used: travel diary data from the
Southern California Association of Governments and the 2001 academic 
performance index (API) from the California Department of
Education. School quality in the traveler’s residential and destination
zone was included in the multinomial model to test for their effects
on mode choice.

Travel Diaries

In this study, trip data came from the 2001 Post Census Regional
Household Travel Survey (RHTS) by the Southern California
Association of Governments. The survey covered six counties in
the region: Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, Ventura, 
and Imperial. The survey, which occurs once every 10 years,
gathers information on where, why, and how people travel. Travelers 
from 16,939 households reported a total of 134,247 trips from
spring 2001 to spring 2002, including 6,058 school trips in which
the primary or secondary trip purpose was attending classes.
Because it does not belong to the Los Angeles region, Imperial
County was excluded from further analysis, leaving 16,024 households 
in the sample. Travelers completed a 24-h travel diary for one
weekday or a 48-h travel diary for a weekend. Weekend households
reported travel during a Friday–Saturday or Sunday–Monday
period.
The sample of school trips for this study was selected based on age
(5 to 18 years) and the trip purpose indicated in the survey. School
trips were divided into two types according to whether the students
were attending kindergarten to sixth-grade or seventh- to 12th-grade
schools. Such a division provides more detailed information on the
most influential factors in mode choice for students in these two
age groups, because parents of elementary and high school students
have different preferences for schools (33). A trip was selected if the
primary or secondary trip purpose was school (attending classes),
which consisted of 2,117 trips by kindergartners to sixth graders and
1,529 trips by seventh to 12th graders. Figure 1 shows that, among
tudents ages 5 to 18 years.

students 5 to 18 years old, more than 60% traveled by private vehicle,
20% to 25% traveled on foot or by bicycle, and slightly more than 12%
traveled by school bus; few students traveled by transit bus or subway.
In this study, the analysis focuses on three mode choices: walking or
biking (nonmotorized modes), bus (school bus and transit bus), and
private vehicle, which reduces the sample size to 3,603 trips of students
ages 5 to 18, who attended either kindergarten to sixth-grade or
seventh- to 12th-grade schools.
Nonmotorized modes are often less popular as travel distance
increases. Figure 2 reports the frequency of trips in different travel
distances and modes. The travel distance for each trip was not
recorded in the original survey data. However, the trip origins and
destinations have been geocoded to the nearest census tract—a U.S.
census statistical unit that covers a population between 2,500 and
8,000, which can be used to calculate the distance from home to
school. In Figure 2, the distribution of the major modes shows that
about 50% of school trips of less than 1/2 mi were made by walking
or biking, and the rate decreased with distance. When the trip length
was more than 2 mi, the rate dropped to only 15%. Travel by school
bus or local bus accounted for a small percentage of short-distance
trips, but the mode share of bus rose to almost 20% for trips of more
than 2 mi. A private vehicle was used for most trips, accounting for
44.39% of the mode share even for trips of less than 1/2 mi. When
the distance was greater than 1 mi, almost 70% of trips were made
by private vehicles.

School Quality Measure

A significant factor in parental schooling decisions and home buyers’ 
residential location choice is school quality (33–35). Extensive
literature on urban economics and public finance has discussed
which characteristics of school performance are valued by parents
(30–33, 35–37 ). Parents tend to value school outputs (i.e., proficiency 
scores) more than inputs (i.e., per pupil expenditures) (32).
They are also likely to choose a school based on peer group quality, 
such as test scores and student characteristics, rather than the
value-added measure of school effectiveness (36, 38, 39). Parents
use test scores and reputation to rule out schools with lower performance, 
even though sometimes they are “ambivalent” about test
scores (33, p. 77). On the one hand, test scores may signal academic 
achievement. On the other hand, they may reflect the socioeconomic 
status of the students rather than the quality of the learning

experience. Some parents still think test scores are a good measure
of quality. Part of the reason is that test scores are publicly available, 
and quite often they are the only tangible evidence of quality
that many parents have.
Because parents prefer proficiency scores over per pupil expenditures 
and school effectiveness measures, a proficiency score in
California, the API, was used to measure school quality. This score
measures a school’s academic performance and growth on the basis
of test scores of students who participate in the Standardized Testing 
and Reporting Program and the California High School Exit
Examination. API scores are calculated by the California Department 
of Education and disseminated directly to schools and districts.
The API scores also are posted on the California Department of
Education and most schools’ websites, making the API the most
commonly used measure of academic performance. The API score
measures only public school performance for elementary, middle,
and high schools. Therefore, this paper selected school trips of students 
attending either a kindergarten to sixth-grade or a seventh- to
12th-grade school as defined in the survey, whereas trips related to
other school types (i.e., daycare or preschool, trade or technical, college, 
postgraduate) were excluded because of a lack of comparable
quality measures.

Models
Explanatory variables in the model include travel distance, calculated
on the basis of census tract location information, and several traveler 
sociodemographics from the 2001 RHTS: age, gender, number
of vehicles in the household, race, and household income category.
Records for trips with unknown household income were removed.
The survey’s original eight categories of household annual income
were reclassified into three categories: low (less than $35,000),
medium ($35,000 to $75,000), and high (over $75,000). The grouping 
of the household income categories was a compromise between
the 2001 RHTS’s eight original categories and the income categories 
defined by U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD). According to HUD, the 2000 low-income limit in
the Los Angeles area was below $37,500 for a family of three and
$41,700 for a family of four. Generally, household income is
slightly lower than family income as family counts only households
with at least two members. Thus, this study chose $35,000 as the
upper bound for low-income households. Also a median family
income from HUD of $52,100 was used as a baseline, then 30% of
the median was subtracted and added as the lower and upper bounds
for medium income, which are $36,450 and $67,750. These values
are reasonably close to the recategorized medium income boundary
of $35,000 and $75,000.
Two additional variables were added from the 2000 census: residential 
density to measure the compactness of the urban form and
median house value of owner-occupied units to proxy neighborhood
quality. Increases in density were expected to lower the size of each
school’s catchment area and to shorten potential travel distances, thus
encouraging walking and biking. In housing research, median house
value often is used to proxy neighborhood amenities and a community’s 
socioeconomic status. The socioeconomic status was found to
have a positive association with older students but no association with
younger ones (40). However, the socioeconomic status of a neighborhood 
is often correlated with household income and car ownership.
When the household income effect is greater than the neighborhood

amenity effect, the median house value is inversely related to walking
and biking.
Finally, to measure neighborhood school quality in the origins and
destinations, API scores were used for kindergarten to sixth graders
and seventh to 12th graders. Origin refers to a student’s residential
neighborhood, whereas destination refers to a student’s destination
neighborhood (Table 1). Student travelers’ mode choice was predicted 
with a discrete choice model (i.e., multinomial logit model),
which is based on discrete consumer choice observed in real markets
and random utility theory (12, 19).

RESULTS

Results from the multinomial logit model are shown in Table 2. For
kindergarten to sixth-grade travelers, three factors appear to dominate 
their decision making with regard to the choice of walking or
bicycling: travel distance, number of vehicles in the household, and
age. The significance of these factors is not surprising, as they have
been identified in previous studies (11, 13, 19). Age is a particularly
important element for this group, probably because parents are
especially concerned about personal safety and road safety when
their children are that age. Regardless of the traveler’s age, distance
and number of vehicles appear to be universally important in mode
choice models.
With seventh- to 12th-grade travelers, age is still a significant determinant 
but shows a negative effect on active commuting. The older
the students are, the more likely they are to use a private vehicle or
bus. The variables of distance and number of vehicles are still significant 
for walking and biking, but the magnitude, especially for distance, 
decreases markedly, from -0.567 to -0.110. Household income
variables also become significant for seventh to 12th graders in their
mode choice. Medium- and high-income groups are less likely than
students from low-income families to walk, bike, or ride the bus.
A large percentage of Hispanics live in the Los Angeles region and
they have distinctive commute patterns. Hispanic students are more
likely to commute by foot, bicycle, or bus and less likely to use private 
vehicles. This is especially true for kindergarten to sixth graders;
on average, being Hispanic is associated with a 0.084 decrease in
the probability of choosing private vehicles, holding all other factors
constant.

The variable of school quality is significant only at the 95% level
for kindergarten to sixth graders’ bus mode choice; a higher neighborhood 
school quality tends to increase the probability of choosing 
a bus over a private vehicle. However, for seventh to 12th
graders, it is the distance from home to the nearest high school that
increases the probability of taking a bus rather than the variable of
school quality.
Marginal effects and the elasticity of the explanatory variables
on walking or biking and bus and private vehicle usage are shown
in Table 3. Again, for kindergarten to sixth graders, distance, age,
and number of vehicles are the only factors that are significant at
the 95% level in the choice to walk or bike. These factors are also
highly elastic, meaning that a percentage change in these variables
causes a large percentage change in nonmotorized modes. For bus
mode, several household and built environment variables become
significant. A higher residential density and median house value
reduce the probability of taking a bus. Because the original travel
diaries (Figure 2) suggested that the bus was much more likely to
be used for long-distance trips, a higher density implies shorter
potential distances and, hence, a lower likelihood of taking the bus.
For seventh to 12th graders, the importance of age drops, whereas
several socioeconomic and built environment variables become
significant with regard to the walking and biking mode choice. A
10% increase in the distance from home to the nearest high school
raises the probability of taking a bus to school by 2.86%, while an
identical increase in residential density increases the probability of
walking or biking by 1.09%. It is consistent with the expectation
that an increase in density lowers a school’s catchment area and
thus raises the probability of walking or biking. This modest effect
was shown to be associated with older but not younger students for
whom age and distance probably have an overriding influence. As
Calvo’s study shows, distance is a primary consideration for most
parents in school choice decisions, especially at the elementary
school level (33).
The models have a modest goodness of fit; the pseudo-R2 is
between 12% and 13%. One possible way to increase the explanatory
power of the model is to include other influential factors, such as parents’ 
work schedules (2) and travelers’ perceptions about the local
neighborhood (26). Unfortunately, these pieces of information either
were not collected by the survey or were not reported by a large
number of travelers.

CONCLUSION

There is an urgent call for researchers’ attention to reduce car
dependency among children and adolescents to cope with their
increasing physical inactivity and obesity rates. Although car ownership 
and household income are two of the most common socioeconomic 
factors contributing to children’s car dependency
(10, 11, 41, 42), researchers have endeavored to discover other
important factors so as to provide innovative policies and programs
to encourage walking and biking. Among these factors, some researchers
believe that redesigning the built environment can provide 
a pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly and safe path to school and
increase active commuting (9). The exercise during students’ journeys 
to school complements students’ limited in-school physical
education classes and improves students’ well-being (4). However, are
these changes in built environment sufficient to influence students’
mode choice?
School location and characteristics could be one of the biggest
obstacles for walking and biking (13, 14, 19). A recent national
household travel survey suggests that school supply has not kept
up with population movements (3). Since the locations of schools
and homes are relatively immobile, the distance from home to
school cannot be easily changed in the short term or through current 
school transportation policies. Before an innovative policy to

shorten travel distance can be initiated, it is necessary to understand 
how students’ travel behavior responds to school quality. In
the current literature, there are, nevertheless, very few empirical
studies that estimate the effects of school quality on students’
travel behavior.
This study links school quality and location to student’s mode
choice in school trips. Although the results do not suggest a strong
correlation between school quality and walking and biking, they
do reveal a strong relationship between school location and bus
mode choice for seventh- to 12th-grade students. A long distance
from home to the nearest high school increased the likelihood
that students chose a bus over a private vehicle, probably because
it was convenient for parents to let their children take the bus
when the travel distance was long. Parents were likely to have a
limited time budget that they allocated to chauffeuring. Therefore, 
they might substitute car use with bus when the travel cost
was too high.

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

The school choice policy, which is a major policy that attempts to
provide more education opportunities to low-income families,
allows students to attend non-neighborhood schools. While this

policy and alternative schools are still in the experimental stage,
the effect of district boundaries on travel behavior is undeniable.
Parents who are aware of this policy apply for the limited number
of seats. Students who have the opportunity to leave their neighborhood 
schools are prone to travel greater distances and use
different modes of travel compared with those who attend neighborhood 
schools. This study tested the hypothesis that students living 
in areas with lower-quality schools are more likely to travel
farther for better schools and hence have a lower tendency to walk
or bike.
The results of this study, nonetheless, showed that students living 
in areas with better quality schools did not exhibit higher rates
of active commuting compared with those living in low-performing
school service areas. The outcomes have several complex implications. 
Ostensibly, distance, car ownership, and age still dominate
the decision on mode choice over school quality. On the other hand,
the results may suggest that students from low-performing areas
did not travel very far because they would have had lower active
commuting rates otherwise. Although there was insufficient information 
to disentangle who exercised the intradistrict and interdistrict 
transfer options, the limited geographic coverage of school
buses could have prevented families without cars from leaving
their neighborhood schools. While the school choice policy is well
intended to increase students’ school options, transportation assistance 
for students is often neglected. The state government, school
districts, and local education agencies should consider providing
school buses for a wider geographic area because they may be the
only transportation means for low-income families to reach distant
schools and it may be more convenient for parents than chauffeuring 
their children in private vehicles for high- and medium-income
families.
