Perceived challenges and facilitators of active travel following
implementation of the School Travel-Plan programme in New Zealand
children and adolescents
abstract
Promoting active travel modes has the potential to improve health outcomes, enhance social capital, and
reduce traf<U+FB01>c related congestion whilst also providing economic bene<U+FB01>ts. With this focus in mind,
Auckland's transport agency developed a series of School Travel Plan (STP) initiatives in Auckland schools
as part of the Travel Wise for Schools programme. The initiative incorporated educational and promotional campaigns to promote carpooling and active transport, combined with the Walking School Bus,
cycle training for students, parking restrictions, building of traf<U+FB01>c calming measures, and improvement of
roads and footpaths. The aim of the present study was to explore the perceived challenges and facilitators of active travel to and from school following implementation of the STP Programme through
qualitative feedback from children and adolescents. Focus groups consisting of 4–6 children and 6–12adolescents were conducted in 10 primary schools and three high schools respectively. The challengesand facilitators for children and adolescents focused primarily on intrapersonal, and interpersonal factors. The themes emerged were similar but for different contexts. Under the child factors category <U+FB01>ve
main themes emerged: peers, enjoyment, safety, parent behaviour and health and <U+FB01>tness. The main
themes for adolescents were: peers/enjoyment, driving licence, safety and health & engagement. Overall,children and adolescents preferred active modes from passive ones, understood the bene<U+FB01>ts of active
travel and provided valuable suggestions which formed the basis of future plan implementation.
1. Introduction
    Promoting a shift from passive to active travel has the potential to improve individual health and environmental outcomes long term.
The concept of travel demand management (TDM) has existed since 1970s and measures have been proposed and implemented over the
years (Gärling et al., 2002; Gärling and Schuitema, 2007; Ge et al., 2014; Meyer, 1999). TDM involves the implementation of a set of actions
with the goal of making people aware of alternative travel options other than car (Meyer, 1999). The aim of TDM is to reduce traf<U+FB01>c
congestion. Accordingly, since 2005 school-based travel programmes including Safe Routes To School (SRTS) (Boarnet et al., 2005a, 2005b;
Cooper and McMillan, 2010), and Travelwise-School Travel Plan (STP) programmes (Hinckson and Badland, 2011; Hinckson et al., 2011;
Mammen et al., 2013) have been implemented to achieve these outcomes. These programmes have been successful in reducing pedestrian
injury (DiMaggio and Li, 2013), and increasing walking and cycling to school in primary school children after a period of time (Boarnet
et al., 2005a; Hinckson et al., 2011; Staunton et al., 2003). Since the implementation of the SRTS programme in New York City there has
been a reduction of 33% in pedestrian injury among youth (DiMaggio and Li, 2013), an increase from 40.5% to 42.2% in walking and cycling
to school in NZ children after three years of STP implementation, and an increase of 5.5 percentage points in the proportion of children
walking and bicycling to school after <U+FB01>ve years of participating in a SRTS programme in 801 American schools (McDonald et al., 2014).
While the results have been encouraging there are no studies examining the perceptions of children and adolescents regarding the
challenges and facilitators to active travel during implementations of these programmes. The aim of the present study was to explore the
perceived intrapersonal and interpersonal challenges and facilitators of active travel to and from school following implementation of the
STP programme. Qualitative feedback was gained from New Zealand children and adolescents to better inform future programme
implementation.
2. Methods
    Focus group participants were recruited from 10 primary schools and three high schools. The schools were located in Auckland, New
Zealand. In each focus group there was a mix of active and non-active travellers. The study protocol was approved by the Institution's
ethics committee (AUTEC 05/227). Consent from the parents and assent from the children and adolescents were received. The participants
were asked speci<U+FB01>c questions using a semi-structured process. Responses were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim. Key themes
were drawn via thematic analysis (Attride-Stirling, 2001; Pope et al., 2000).
3. Results and discussion
    There were 4–6 children (years 4–6, ages 8–10) per focus group from 10 primary schools (52 children) and 6–12 (total 26) adolescents
from three high schools (years 9–12, ages 13–16). This was a convenience sample however, gender and travel mode were on the whole
fairly represented (Table 1).
    The participants were asked a variety of questions about the School Travel plan programme. The <U+FB01>ndings in this article relate to
challenges and facilitators of active travel to and from school following programme implementation. The thematic analysis, revealed that
challenges and facilitators emerged from the same themes. Challenges and facilitators were categorized into child and adolescent factors
(Table 2). The themes emerged for children and adolescents were similar but for different contexts.
    Under the Child factors category <U+FB01>ve main themes emerged: peers, enjoyment, safety, parent behaviour and health and <U+FB01>tness. The
main facilitators for active travel to school for children were travelling with friends and having fun. Almost none of the children wanted to
be driven to school, most children (96%) preferred active modes of travel.
3.1. Peers
    The children on the Walking School Bus (WSB) commented that they enjoyed the opportunity to socialise with friends during the
journey to school, it was a fun and exciting way to get to school, a means to catch up with friends, and make new friends. Conversely, not
having a friend to walk with was identi<U+FB01>ed as a challenge which in some cases prevented children from walking to school.
3.2. Enjoyment
    The children enjoyed walking to school as part of the WSB because it gave them the opportunity to be with their friends, play games,
talk about “things” that mattered to them such as “star wars and lego”, and arranged play dates. Convenience, speed of travel, and
generally, being outdoors were also reasons given.
3.3. Safety
    The children saw the WSB as a facilitator to increasing safety. Children wanted to see more WSB initiated as they perceived that it was
safer to walk to school as part of a WSB. Concerns raised by the children included; taunting from teenagers, uncontrolled dogs and cars
reversing out of driveways while walking to and from school. Very few children cycled to school. NZ primary schools in general do not
encourage cycling to school because of the risk of theft and traf<U+FB01>c safety concerns. The danger of road traf<U+FB01>c was raised as a challenge by
the children. Despite STP targeting road safety issues, the area surrounding some schools experienced heavy traf<U+FB01>c <U+FB02>ows that probably
could not be addressed solely by STP implementation.
3.4. Parents
    Parents’ knowledge and involvement were seen as both facilitators and challenges to active travel. Children asked for more parent
availability so more WSB could be organised and with “wider” routes so more children could participate. The children suggested that
people could meet at designated places to join onto the WSB and skits could be performed at the parents’ assemblies to encourage parents’
involvement. The children also raised the issue that parents needed to be educated about crossing the road safely and use the pedestrian
crossing accordingly. It was commented that some parents’ behaviour had not changed as consistently they seemed to break the rules by
parking close to the corners, on yellow lines and in driveways. Some parents parked on the pick-up/drop off zone before the bell rang to
ensure parking. Other parents seemed to be impatient because they were not able to park close to the school. An example was given where
parents stopped in the middle of the road, calling their child to run across the road to get into the car.
     Health and <U+FB01>tness. Health and Fitness was seen as an important facilitator to active travel. Children commented that they preferred to
walk or cycle to school, mainly because of the potential health and <U+FB01>tness bene<U+FB01>ts. When children were asked to compare whether
students walked to school at the time of the focus group compared to prior of the implementation of the STP, some thought that there was
a change. Reasons offered for the change were: better weather conditions, the Walk to School programme, media coverage of low physical
activity, and higher levels of obesity in children. The children who walked stated they enjoyed walking because they liked fresh air and
exercise.
    Under the Adolescent factors category <U+FB01>ve themes emerged: peers & enjoyment, driving licence, safety and health & engagement.
3.5. Peers and enjoyment
    School bus patronage was a common mode of travel to and from school for high school students. The students commented that it was
“cool” or “fun” catching the bus “with friends” and “hanging out”. Students also agreed that it was convenient and quicker than using the
car. The fare was viewed as inexpensive and was not an issue. The students also suggested, a follow-on concept from the walking school
bus, “walk with a buddy” to encourage walking. Overall, high school students seemed to favour bus usage to commute to school over any
other mode of transport.
3.6. Driving licence
    While independent walking or bussing might have been the primary mode of transport for senior high school students, driving became
the preferred option, once they received a driving licence. When high school students were asked whether they would continue using the
bus once they turned 15/16, some admitted that they would prefer to drive themselves to school than use the bus. The main reasons for
the future shift were: easiness, convenience, and independence. These students spoke favourably of carpooling. For high school students
who travelled to school by car, convenience, laziness, injury and bad weather were the main reasons given for not actively commuting to
school.
3.7. Safety
    Students were greatly concerned with safety of the buses. Most buses did not have seat belts and those that did, wear was not
endorsed. Students also commented that buses got overcrowded and standing in the bus, regardless of the yellow line that marked the
<U+FB02>oor where standing should not be allowed, was not uncommon. The students commented that the drivers seemed to have no authority
controlling bad behaviour on the bus. There was an overwhelming agreement that more buses needed to be provided so that each student
had a seat on the bus. The students felt that many of the concerns would be alleviated and they would feel safer. Cycling safety. Some high
school students favoured cycling over any other mode of transport especially when the commute was short. In one high school where the
STP was not fully implemented yet, students noticed that cycling or cycling safety was not promoted and that bike racks were limited and
not appropriate for use. For that reason students noticed that cycling had declined in their school. Those who cycled found it intimidating
as they perceived people in cars to be arrogant and angry with cyclists. While high school students were open to the idea of cycling, low
security measures at school for storing their bikes prevented them from riding to school. Security cameras, fake security cameras, sensors,
fenced shed, secure bike racks were offered as suggestions. However, high school students commented that they felt safe as the number of
students actively commuted to school had increased. Overall, students agreed that it was generally safer to walk/cycle to school.
3.8. Health and engagement
    For high school students walking was seen as a good way to exercise, enjoy the fresh air, stay healthy and an opportunity to talk to
friends about important personal issues. It was observed that since the STP programme, more students walked during the breaks and
there were more sport teams available and generally, more people playing sport. High school students suggested that initiatives like the
“Nike Challenge” should be present in schools to establish a norm and motivate people to exercise. The expositions were seen by high
school students as effective ways to communicate messages like active commuting and sustainable transport in a fun and engaging way.
Highlights from the “expo” were the opportunity to talk to bus drivers, to voice concerns and suggestions for change, free bags for cyclists,
competitions with awards, and rewards. Students saw the programme as a way to reduce carbon emissions, reduce traf<U+FB01>c congestion,
provide a safer environment for cyclists and pedestrians, save money on petrol, keep people active and reduce the obesity epidemic. The
students felt that the programme was worthwhile and was “working” because it had changed students’ attitudes towards bussing and
cycling.
4. Conclusion
    There are no other qualitative studies describing the challenges and facilitators to active travel following implementation of a school-based travel programme from the children's and adolescents' perspective, and therefore, comparison of results is dif<U+FB01>cult. The themes
emerged for children and adolescents were similar but for different contexts. Children and adolescents enjoyed travelling with friends as
part of the walking school bus for children and school bus for adolescents. The children and adolescents offered several suggestions for
increasing safety and involvement in the programme. Overall, the STP programme was described as worthwhile with the potential to
change behaviour long term.

