School physical activity policies and active transport to school
among pupils in the Czech Republicabstract
Background: Previous studies indicate that the level of physical activity (PA) signi<U+FB01>cantly a<U+FB00>ects
children's health. Active transport to school is PA on a daily basis that may contribute substantially to the overall volume of moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA). Aim of our
study was to explore whether schools' health promotion and PA-related policies are associated
with active commuting in 15-years-old girls and boys actively commuting to and from school andwhether gender di<U+FB00>erences on active commuting exist.
Methods: Students in 9th grades (N = 1522; mean age 15 years; 47.7% boys) from the Czech
Republic were enrolled. The active transport of adolescents was self-reported within the Health
Behavior in School-aged Children survey in the year 2010. Data about school polices were obtained from the school-level questionnaire which was responded to by school principals.
Associations between active transport and school health or PA policies were calculated by logistic regression.
Results: We found that adolescents actively commuted more often (OR/95%-CI: 3.43/1.87–6.27
[girls]; 2,87/1.46–5.642 [boys]) in schools which promote students’ walking and cycling to or
from school. Adolescents from schools that are planning an implementation of health promotion
reported even higher levels of use of active transport (OR/95%-CI: 5.32/2.38–11.92 [girls]; 4.54/
2.01–10.24 [boys]). The association was stronger in boys compared to girls.
Conclusion: School policies and programs promoting active transport to and from schools in the
Czech Republic contribute to the use of active transport and should be widely implemented.
Gender-sensitive approaches should also be taken into account.
1. Introduction
    The level of physical activity (PA) signi<U+FB01>cantly a<U+FB00>ects the health of young people, improves the cardiovascular metabolic risk, and
contributes to an optimal physical and cognitive development (Andersen et al., 2006, 2011a, 2011b). According to the recommendations for health-enhancing PA levels, adolescents should reach at least a minimum of a daily 60 min of moderate vigorous
physical activity (MVPA) (World Health Organization, 2010).
    Meeting the MVPA recommendation can be achieved by di<U+FB00>erent types of PA in di<U+FB00>erent contexts (e.g. organized leisure time,
active play with friends). However, a large proportion of children are physically active for less than 60 min a day (Kalman et al.,
2015). Active transport is a promising approach that can signi<U+FB01>cantly help to achieve the recommended level of 60 min of MVPA a
day (Carver et al., 2011) and it is easy to integrate into daily life. Active transport is most often de<U+FB01>ned as walking, cycling, or other
human-powered modes of transport used for practical purposes of getting from one place to another in everyday life (Sallis et al.,
2004). Active transport (walking or cycling) to or from school may contribute to the overall volume of MVPA by 33% in both boys
and girls (Southward et al., 2012). Active transport also improves the development of motor skills in children (Davis and Jones,
1996), as well as cognitive performance in adolescent girls (Martínez-Gómez et al., 2011). Active transport is also associated with
better cardiovascular health and lower body weight (Larouche et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2013). Active commuters are also more physically active in non-curricular physical activity than non-active commuters (Faulkner et al., 2009). Social bene<U+FB01>ts of active transport
were also frequently reported in children because it provides a good opportunity to meet and spend time with friends; there is the
chance to talk to them or even to make new friends (Kirby and Inchley, 2013).
    If di<U+FB00>erences between countries are taken into account, the prevalence of active transport between countries varies considerably.
For example, in the Netherlands almost 50% of adolescents reported active commuting to school on most school days because there is
a widespread active commuting on bicycle and this way of transport is also part of the culture in the Netherlands (Bere et al., 2008). A
high prevalence of active transport to school is present in Switzerland (78%), because schools are easily accessible from homes by
walking or cycling (Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008). Almost two-thirds of adolescents actively commuted to school in Estonia and Sweden
(Chillón et al., 2010). However, less than 20% of the 15-year-old adolescents in Australia did so (Booth et al., 2007). Reasons are
bigger distances between schools and their homes. Almost 65% of Czech school-aged children aged 11 to 15 commute to school on
foot or by bicycle (Pavelka et al., 2012).
    Some studies showed that PA in various forms, such as active transport, as well as the lessons of physical education and organized
leisure-time sport, has decreased (Hallal et al., 2012; Patel et al., 2010). The reasons for the decreasing level of PA can generally be
noticed in higher urbanization-related car-dependent town planning (Katzmarzyk and Mason, 2009). Lower levels of safety (tra<U+FB03>c,
few pedestrians and bicycle paths) and/or greater environmental pollution also contribute to the decreasing level of PA (De Vet et al.,
2011; Durand et al., 2011). Strategies to promote active transport should take the determinants of active transport from di<U+FB00>erent
socio-ecological levels (individual and physical environmental factors) into account to support more children in walking or cycling to
school. Within the environmental level of in<U+FB02>uence PA-related school policies might be important to promote active commuting to
and from school but this determinant was rarely examined (Panter et al., 2008). Schools have direct contact with students for
approximately six hours each day and for up to 13 critical years of their social, psychological, physical, and intellectual development
(Miller et al., 2009). However, only a minority of elementary schools have integrated PA as a health policy theme in all grades
(Cardon et al., 2012).
    Taking the current body of literature into account, we identi<U+FB01>ed programs that encourage active transport worldwide by applying
strategies such as a walking school bus, the Safe Routes to School program, or the Gold Medal Schools program (Chillon et al., 2011).
Government of the Czech Republic supports the National Strategy Health 2020 which is part of European health policy framework
Health 2020 in 2014. This should implement a mechanism to improve health and healthy behavior of the Czech population. Since
1994 the Czech Republic is part of Healthy Cities 21st Century project. Goal of this project is to improve and support quality of life in
municipalities. The Czech Republic is one of the 43 members of the European network Schools for Health in Europe since 1993 also.
The program helps schools to apply the above-mentioned strategy and to create conditions to promote health. In contrast, evidence
for PA-related policies which takes into account such factors as personal, social and environmental is low (Heath et al., 2012). Aim of
our study is to explore whether schools' health promotion and PA-related policies (rule and support for active commuting) are
associated or related with active commuting in 15-years-old girls and boys actively commuting to and from school and also whether
gender di<U+FB00>erences on active commuting exist.
2. Material and methods
    For 30 years, the Health Behavior in School-aged Children (HBSC) study has been a pioneer cross-national study gaining insight
into young people's well-being, health behaviors and their social context. This research collaboration with the WHO Regional O<U+FB03>ce
for Europe is conducted every four years in 45 countries and regions across Europe and North America. With adolescents making
about one sixth of the world's population, the HBSC-study uses its <U+FB01>ndings to inform policy and practice to improve the lives of
millions of young people. The data used in the present study are based on the 2009/2010 Czech national HBSC survey. HBSC focuses
on a wide range of health, education, social, and family measures a<U+FB00>ecting young people's health and well-being in students aged 11,
13, and 15 years old. For the purpose of the survey HBSC uses an internationally accepted questionnaire. HBSC has been conducted
under the auspices of the WHO every four years since 1983 Schools that support or promote children's walking and cycling were
assessed by the School Level Questionnaire (SLQ), which was also used and validated in the 2010 HBSC survey. The SLQ asked
questions to the teacher and was used in all the schools participating in the data collection related to the children's questionnaire on
transportation.
2.1. Sample
    The sample was based on a random sampling procedure of schools in the Czech Republic, 86 schools from all 14 regions of the
Czech Republic were randomly chosen as being representative in accordance with the international HBSC protocol (Currie et al.,
2012). We registered 6553 students, of whom 5709 took part (none of them refused to participate in the study); 844 pupils were
absent. After a visual screening of the questionnaires we excluded 23 of them because of a lack of credibility. The total data set
contained 5284 questionnaires. For the purpose of this study only adolescents aged 15 years (n = 1522) were analyzed. Children in
younger age are mainly transported or accompanied to the school by parents. The study sample was fairly evenly divided by gender
(47.7% boys, 52.3% girls).
    For this study, we used two HBSC sources. First, the HBSC survey used questionnaires for adolescents which were collected by a
trained researcher and research assistants in June 2010. The set of questionnaires was administered during a regular 45-minute lesson
on a voluntary and anonymous basis and in the absence of the teacher. 86 elementary schools participated in the study. The overall
response rate was 87%. Non-response was due to illness or other types of absence from school. The total data set contained 5284
questionnaires.
    The second source was based on the SLQ, which was collected in February and March 2012 and completed by the school principal.
The overall response rate for the SLQ was 92.4%. All of the questions used in the HBSC have shown evidence of reliability and validity
(Roberts et al., 2009). Since items were used in multiple countries all the questionnaires used in this study also underwent the process
of forward and backward translation to ensure that the language versions used in this study measured the same construct as the
original language version (Currie et al., 2012).
2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Individual level
    Children's transport was assessed using questions validated in the HBSC survey in 2010: ‘On a typical day is the main part of your
journey to school made by…?’ and ‘On a typical day is the main part of your journey from school made by…?’ with the possible
answers (1) Walking; (2) Bicycle; (3) Bus, train, tram, underground, or boat; (4) Car, motorcycle, or moped; (5) Other means. We
dichotomized the responses by categorizing children walking and cycling to and from school vs. children not using active transport.
The latter was used as the reference category in the logistic regression analyses.
2.2.2. School level
    The school policies related to active transport were assessed by the following items: ‘Does your school support or promote
students’ walking or cycling?’; ‘Does your school mission statement explicitly contain the topics health and health promotion?’; ‘Do
you have a plan for the implementation of the aims for health promotion at your school?’; ‘Does your school focus on fostering a
positive attitude towards physical activity?’, with the possible response categories (1) Yes or (0) No. Further items were: ‘Is your
school a member of a health-promoting school network?’, with the response categories (1) Yes, currently; (2) Yes, previously; (3) No.
We dichotomized this question for the binary regression into two categories, 1 = Yes, currently or previously; 0 = No. ‘Does your
school inform parents about the importance of regular physical activity for their health and the health of their child?’, with the
answering categories (1) Yes, regularly; (2) Yes, from time to time; (3) No. We also dichotomized this question into two possible
answers, 1 = Yes, our school informs parents; 0 = No. (Table 1).
2.3. Statistical analyses
    Descriptive analyses for boys and girls separately were performed as the <U+FB01>rst step. Second, binary regression with the Enter
method was used to explore the association between schools which promote or support forms of active transport and children's active
transport for boys and girls separately. The dependent variable was active transport to and from school, i.e. a journey to and from
school on foot or by bicycle (1 = yes, 0 = active transport not used). The independent variables were as follows – schools which
support or promote students’ walking or cycling to and from school; the school mission statement explicitly contains the topics health
and health promotion; a plan for the implementation of the aims for health promotion at the school exists; the school focuses on
fostering a positive attitude towards physical activity; the school is a member of a health-promoting school network; the school
informs parents about the importance of PA for their health and the health of their child; the school has a policy of creating a
supportive school environment and new opportunities for PA. We tested co-linearity of independent variable before regression
analysis. Statistical analyses were performed using the Statistica software, v. 10 and IBM SPSS v. 21. Comparing the percentages was
performed in Statistica CZ. Further analyses were performed using IBM SPSS version 21. Statistical signi<U+FB01>cance was set at 0.05.
3. Results
    Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics of the study sample. The boys walked to and from school more often compared to the girls.
The girls used public transport to and from school signi<U+FB01>cantly more often compared to the boys. The frequency of traveling to school
is higher than that from school for both genders.
    Table 3 presents the results from the logistic regression analyses. We found that the likelihood of active transport to and from
school at schools which promote students’ walking and cycling (like pedestrian crossings with supervision, illuminated sidewalks,
sheltered bicycle storage areas) is signi<U+FB01>cantly higher for boys (OR/CI: 2.87/1.46–5.64) and for girls (OR/CI: 3.43/1.87–6.27); 63.7%
of the schools supported students’ walking and cycling to school or from school. The likelihood of active transport was signi<U+FB01>cantly
higher in schools which have a plan for the implementation of the aims for health promotion (either written or oral rules or recommendations) both in boys (OR/CI: 4.54/2.01–10.24) and girls (OR/CI: 5.32/2.38–11.92). In schools that are members of a health-promoting network girls had a higher probability of using active transport. In schools that inform parents about the importance of PA
boys had a signi<U+FB01>cantly higher likelihood of using active transport. We checked co-linearity also. The correlation coe<U+FB03>cient between
variables plan for implementation of the aims for health promotion and informing parents about the importance of PA was 0.114.
4. Discussion
    The aim of our study was to verify whether the health promotion or PA-related policies of schools are re<U+FB02>ected in 15-year-old girls
and boys actively commuting to and from school. Almost half of the adolescents in our study reported that traveling to school takes
between six to <U+FB01>fteen minutes. The boys walked to and from school signi<U+FB01>cantly more often compared to the girls. The girls used
public transport to and from school signi<U+FB01>cantly more often compared to the boys. Active transport was signi<U+FB01>cantly higher in
schools which have a plan for the implementation of the aims for health promotion for boys and girls. In schools that were members
of a health-promoting network the girls had a higher probability of using active transport. In schools that informed parents about the
importance of PA the boys had a signi<U+FB01>cantly higher likelihood of using active transport.
    We found that the boys walked to and from school more often compared to the girls. However, when related to school PA-related
policies the girls were more active commuters than the boys. Boys were more likely to be physically active than girls in previous
studies (Baquet et al., 2014; Spencer et al., 2015). McDonald (2012) suggested that in general boys are more likely to walk to and
from school than girls. They also found that boys cycle to and from school two to three times more frequently than girls. McDonald
(2012) predicted that the reasons for the greater level of participation of boys in active transport depends on the increased likelihood
of their parents granting permission for independent walking and cycling compared to girls of the same age. However, there are
several factors that a<U+FB00>ect active transport and the overall level of PA. The most important are travel time, distance, the degree of
urbanization (Kemperman and Timmermans, 2014), personal safety, weather conditions (Kirby and Inchley, 2013), and also walkability (Christiansen et al., 2014). Kirby and Inchley (2013) also mentioned physical discomfort, particularly feelings of tiredness and
having to carry heavy school bags, or just the laziness of secondary students as being deterrents to active travel.
    We found that a school's membership of a health promotion network is associated with active transport among girls; they use
active transport almost three times more in schools that are members of such a network. Boys seem to be more active in general
(Baquet et al., 2014; Spencer et al., 2015). However, our results show that girls are more susceptible to policy interventions and
physical activity. Our results are consistent with the study of Tjomsland et al. (2014), who stated that membership of a school health
promotion network helps schools to implement health and physical activity policies. School health policies are also widely connected
with other interventions, such as physical education, classroom activities, and after-school sports. These activities, together with
active transport, will increase the level of adolescents’ MVPA (Heath et al., 2012). Policies and interventions such as the Walk to
School program in the USA (Vaughn et al., 2009), children walking to school in Italy (World Health Organization, 2002), or Living
Streets in the United Kingdom (Adams et al., 2012) seem to be e<U+FB00>ective programs to increase the level of active commuting to school.
The Living Streets program also reports on the health outcomes of active commuting (Sinnett and Powell, 2012). The Walk to School
program had a positive impact on policy changes and improvements to the physical environment (Vaughn et al., 2009). Two other
programs, Safe Routes to School (DiMaggio et al., 2016) and the Walking School Bus (Mendoza et al., 2012), have limited evaluations, but these activities are viewed positively by parents and schools and also have a positive e<U+FB00>ect on the level of children's active
commuting (Davison et al., 2008).
4.1. Strengths and limitations
    Our study has several strengths. The most important are the large national sample which was included in the study and its high
response rate. We used data from a standardized questionnaire used for the national data collection of the HBSC study. Our survey has
some limitations as well. One is the reliance on only child's self-reporting about their journey to and from school and the level of
con<U+FB01>dence in correct answers from the school-level questionnaire. Potential confounders may be the size a of village where schools
are located, economic factors and social desirability. A third limitation is the cross-sectional design of the HBSC study, which does not
allow us to draw <U+FB01>rm conclusions about the causal pathway. The study focuses only on a national sample from the Czech Republic;
results in other countries could be di<U+FB00>erent; however, we can expect similar results in other Central European countries thanks to the
similar political and economic background.
4.2. Recommendations
    We found that school policies were positively associated with active transport. Theoretically, school policies have a positive e<U+FB00>ect
on a healthy lifestyle and should be widely implemented. Also, ensuring the safety of active transport to school is crucial although the
issue of supporting physical activity and a healthy lifestyle is more complicated. Further studies should focus on the pathway between
physical activity and health, and within the framework also on barriers in schools and reasons why policies are not extended to all
schools.
5. Conclusion
    We found that school policies are an e<U+FB00>ective tool to support PA and active transport to or from school (Dobbins et al., 2013;
Morton et al., 2016). School policies stimulated PA and increased children's active behavior, especially walking and cycling to school
in both boys and girls. PA policies had a positive impact on both genders, although more on boys (Biddle et al., 2014; Martínez-
Vizcaíno et al., 2014). Every school should promote walking or cycling to and from school and they should also create and implement
plans for health promotion like some European schools are doing already (Leurs et al., 2005; Mura et al., 2015). Children have a
greater chance to use active transport in elementary schools that have written policies for promoting PA (Brown et al., 2013;
Drenowatz et al., 2013; Kriemler et al., 2011). We recommend to every school to have an o<U+FB03>cial policy in place that promotes health
and physical activity through active commuting.