Impacts of parental gender and attitudes on children’s
school travel mode and parental chauffeuring behavior:
results for California based on the 2009 National
Household Travel Survey
Abstract Research has shown that parental attitudes are a significant predictor of children’s active commuting (walking or biking) to school. However, the impact of parental
gender on parental attitudes, and the link between parental attitudes and the gender gap in
parental chauffeuring behavior have not received much attention. This paper examines
these questions by applying discrete choice models to California data from the 2009
National Household Travel Survey while controlling for a wide range of variables characterizing parents, their children, households, schools, and the local built environment. Our
results, conveyed via odds ratios, show that mothers are more likely to have higher concerns about traffic volume, which in turn reduces the likelihood that their children will
walk or bike to school. Moreover, even though parental attitudes significantly influence
parental chauffeuring behavior, their ability to explain the gender chauffeuring gap is
limited. When holding equal concerns, mothers are still more likely than fathers to
chauffeur their children to school. Finally, while distance to school and several land use
measures (e.g., population density, urbanization level, and percentage of renters) are statistically significant, the impact of an objective measure of walkability is quite small.
These results suggest that interventions targeting an increase in children’s walking and
biking to school should focus on the concerns of mothers, especially as they relate to traffic
characteristics.
Introduction
Ever since active commuting (walking or biking) to school was proposed as a policy
intervention to reduce childhood obesity in the U.S., it has attracted much research
attention. Studies have reported that parental attitudes as well as characteristics of children,
households, schools, and the local built environment can be significant predictors of
children’s school travel mode (e.g., Larsen et al. 2009; Leslie et al. 2010; Napier et al.
2011). However, relatively little is known about how parental attitudes are formed, and to
our knowledge no research has explicitly discussed the effects of parental gender on
parental attitudes toward children’s active commuting to school. Since a number of studies
indicate that women usually exhibit greater concerns about traffic and street safety for
themselves (e.g., Loukaitou-Sideris 2005; Yavuz and Welch 2010), we hypothesize that
mothers often have greater concerns about letting their children walk or bike to school,
which in turn affects their children’s school travel mode.
    In addition, children’s school travel mode and parental escort behavior are usually
jointly decided. Some studies show that mothers usually take more household responsibilities to chauffeur or escort their children even after controlling for work status and
commuting patterns (Vovsha and Petersen, 2005; Liu et al. 2012), which has been
attributed by some researchers to women’s traditional gender roles in the division of
household labor (e.g., Schwanen 2007; Giuliano and Schweitzer 2010). However, to our
knowledge, gender differences regarding concerns about children’s active commuting to
school have not yet been analyzed quantitatively to explain the within-household chauffeuring or escorting gap.
    Unlike previous research that focuses on the gender of children to explain how children
travel to and from school (e.g., McMillan et al. 2006; Leslie et al. 2010; Clifton et al. 2011;
McDonald 2012), we investigate specifically how the gender of parents affects parental
attitudes (related to distance to school, traffic characteristics, and crime), children’s school
travel mode, and parental chauffeuring behavior after controlling for land use as well as
household, children, and school characteristics; Fig. 1 depicts the relationships we
examined and how our study contributes to the literature.
    Understanding how gender interacts with attitudes is essential to craft more effective
policies to promote walking and biking to school by children. We focus on California
because it is the largest state by population, it is an add-on state for the 2009 National
Household Travel Survey (NHTS), and its built environment, ethnic composition, and
social make-up are quite diverse, which also allows us to examine the impacts of these
characteristics on parental attitudes, children’s school travel mode, and parental chauffeuring behavior.
Literature review
Given the extensive literature reviews by Davison et al. (2008) and Sirard and Slater
(2008), we focus mainly on studies published after 2007 (see Table 1 for a summary).
Trends and predictors of children’s school travel mode
A number of studies show a decrease in children’s active commuting to school over time
(McDonald 2007a; Buliung et al. 2009; Grize et al. 2010), with the sharpest decline
occurring in the U.S. (McDonald et al. 2011). There is also consistent evidence that girls
walk or bike to school less than boys (Yeung et al. 2008; Larsen et al. 2009), but the
difference in biking is more prominent (Leslie et al. 2010; McDonald 2012). Moreover,
more children travel by active modes from school to home than from home to school
(Leslie et al. 2010; McDonald 2012).
    Parental attitudes play an important role in children’s active commuting to school. Most
studies indicate that when parents perceive fewer barriers or more potential benefits, their
children are more likely to walk or bike to school (e.g., Hume et al. 2009; McDonald et al.
2011). Kerr et al. (2006) report that parental concerns are the strongest predictor of children’s active commuting to school, but school distance was not included in their model.
    In addition, parental socio-demographic characteristics such as education level, work
status, and commuting patterns have been found to be associated with their children’s
travel mode to school (McDonald 2008a; Zhu and Lee 2009; Panter et al. 2010).
    The effects of parental participation in active or transit transportation have been
examined only in a few studies, and the evidence is mixed. From McMillan et al. (2006),
the time parents spend on walking can reduce the gender gap in children’s active commuting to school, but Babey et al. (2009) disagree. According to Zhu and Lee (2009),
regular walking by parents positively correlates with children’s walking to school, but their
study relies on indirect measures of walking. Moreover, Martin et al. (2007) found that
children are more likely to actively commute to school when their parents are physically
active.
    Several household characteristics also affect children’s school travel mode. In general,
African-American and Hispanic students, students from low-income families, and students
whose households have no access to a car are more likely to walk or bike to school, while
White and Asian students, students from high-income families, and students whose
households own more cars are more likely to be driven to school (McDonald 2008b;
Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008; Babey et al. 2009; Rodri´guez and Vogt 2009; Zhu and
Lee 2009; Clifton et al. 2011).
    In addition to gender, children’s age is closely related to their school travel mode. While
most studies report that older children are more likely to walk or bike to school (e.g.,
Yeung et al. 2008; Rodri´guez and Vogt 2009; He 2011; McDonald et al. 2011), McMillan
et al. (2006) found an inverse connection. A few studies also investigated the relationship
between children’s attitudes and their active commuting to school (Martin et al. 2007;
Rodri´guez and Vogt 2009; Leslie et al. 2010; Napier et al. 2011). Similar to parental
attitudes, children are more likely to walk or bike to school when they believe the built
environment is safer and more attractive.
    Of various school characteristics, distance between home and school has consistently
been found to be the most significant factor of children’s active commuting to school
(Yeung et al. 2008; Mitra et al. 2010). Moreover, children who attend public school are
more likely to walk or bike to school (Babey et al. 2009), but the provision of school bus
service has the opposite effect (Zhu and Lee 2009). However, while Braza et al. (2004) find
that students are more likely to actively commute to school in smaller schools, Ewing et al.
(2004) do not. Also, school quality seems to have no influence on children’s active
transportation to school (He 2011).
    A wide range of land use characteristics has been examined to explain children’s school
travel mode. Some researchers compare areas with different levels of urbanization (Babey
et al. 2009; Grize et al. 2010), communities with different levels of walkability (Panter
et al. 2010; Napier et al. 2011), local land use attributes such as density and diversity
(McMillan 2007; Larsen et al. 2009; Mitra et al. 2010; Clifton et al. 2011), or the presence
of various neighborhood facilities and amenities (Leslie et al. 2010). Overall, the built
environment has been found to have significant but small to moderate effects on children’s
active commuting to school. Although school distance could be seen as a built environment
attribute, we categorize it as a school characteristic because households in the same
neighborhood may send their children to different schools (e.g., private schools or some
magnet schools).
Factors influencing parental attitudes and escort behavior
Although parental attitudes are a significant predictor of children’s school travel mode,
only a few papers discuss how parental attitudes are shaped. Lam (2001, 2005) find that
fathers, parents of older children, and parents who work full-time, who have experienced
injuries, or who speak Chinese or Arabic (used as a proxy for culture) tend to perceive
roads as less dangerous for their children. School location matters: the closer the school is,
the less likely the parents are to be concerned about children’s active commuting to school
(Seraj et al. 2012). The built environment also influences parental attitudes: living in
neighborhoods with less traffic and a higher walkability can reduce parental concerns (Lam
2001; Kerr et al. 2006; Napier et al. 2011). Parents also express concerns about gangs and
fights when their children travel to and from school in neighborhoods with high crime and
violence rates (Meyer and Avi Astor 2002). Moreover, mothers who have a higher fear of
crime and a lower sense of community are more likely to be concerned about the outdoor
safety for their children (Prezza et al. 2005), which suggests that parents extend their own
concerns to their children.
    Studies of parental escort behavior consistently report that mothers are more likely than
fathers to perform chauffeuring or escort duties (e.g., Schwanen 2007; Liu et al. 2012), and
women’s traditional gender roles in the division of household labor is the most common
explanation. Work status and commuting patterns also significantly affect parental escort
behavior: parents who do not work or who work part-time, and parents who enjoy more
flexibility at work and whose workplace is closer to home are more likely to chauffeur or
escort their children (e.g., Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008; Liu et al. 2012). Moreover,
land use characteristics such as accessibility, population density, and residential location
are related to parental chauffeuring or escorting (e.g., Schwanen 2007; Yoon et al. 2011).
    However, while children’s school travel mode and parental escort behavior are believed
to be jointly decided, we found only one paper (Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008) that
examines them jointly, and no statistical study that explores if parental attitudes explain
gender differences in escorting children to school (McDonald and Aalborg (2009) relied on
open-ended interviews to explore why parents drive their children to school). These limitations motivate our work.
Data
NHTS data
The 2009 NHTS provides a unique opportunity to analyze the relationship between
parental gender, parental attitudes, children’s school travel mode, and parental escort
behavior. In the California add-on sample, which we analyze in this paper, one parent per
household was asked to answer a series of questions regarding safe routes to school for one
of their randomly selected children aged 5–15 years. In addition to children’s usual travel
mode to and from school, these questions probe parental attitudes about distance to school,
traffic characteristics (volume and speed), crime, and the weather, as these attitudes may
motivate parents to allow their children to walk or bike to and from school. We do not
analyze parental concerns about the weather since it is usually not a restrictor in California.
    Of the 2,857 respondents who answered these questions, 1,642 live within 2 miles from
school. We focus on these households since active commuting to school does not seem a
reasonable option for children living more than 2 miles away from school (according to
Nelson et al. (2008), 2.5 miles is a barrier beyond which children are unlikely to walk or
bike to school). 729 respondents who live within 2 miles from school also completed a
travel diary for their children, thus providing information about children’s school travel
mode and whether or not the parents surveyed accompanied their children to school on
their survey day. A child’s earliest trip from home to school as a student on his/her survey
day was counted as a trip to school when data were extracted from the travel diary.
Detailed socio-demographics and some land use characteristics are also available in the
2009 NHTS dataset.
    From travel diary data, 464 of 729 children were driven to school on their survey day,
229 walked or biked, and 36 used transit. Moreover, 57 % of children who went to school
by car on their survey day were chauffeured by their parent who was surveyed; only 4 % of
children who walked or biked to school were escorted by their parent who was surveyed,
and no child who used transit to school was accompanied by their parent who was surveyed. These numbers show a very low parental escort rate for non-automobile trips.
Although children who were not escorted by their parent surveyed might have been
accompanied to school by other household members, friends, or neighbors, we focus on
school chauffeuring out of concern for the robustness of our results.
    For brevity, Table 2 only lists the definition of explanatory variables considered in our
models; descriptive statistics for all dependent and explanatory variables are available in
the electronic supplementary material. Of the four issues related to children’s walking and
biking to school, parents are more worried about traffic characteristics (volume and speed),
while distance to school and crime are less of a concern. Most children travel to school by
car, 32 % by active mode, and 5 % by public transit (including school bus). The situation is
similar for returning home from school, although fewer children are driven home. On their
survey day, 58 % of children who went to school by car were chauffeured by their parent
who was surveyed.
    In our dataset, most households include two adults, live in urban areas, have a higher
income, and own two or more cars. Moreover, 62 % of the respondents who completed the
safe routes to school questions for their children are female, which may suggest that
mothers are the main caregivers for their children.
Walk score data
In addition to NHTS data, we collected walk scores from walkscore.com for each respondent’s home location after obtaining home location information from Caltrans. The walk
score of a residence, which ranges from 0 to 100 (where higher values denote higher walkability), is based on distance to amenities (such as stores, restaurants, schools, and parks) and
the design of surrounding streets (such as length of street blocks and density of street intersections). For more details, see www2.walkscore.com/pdf/WalkScoreMethodology.pdf. The
walk scores of home locations in our sample, shown in the electronic supplementary material,
suggest that we cover communities with a wide range of walkability levels.
Methodology
In the following, Xi is a 1 9 k vector of explanatory variables for child ‘‘i’’. Before
finalizing our results, we performed the relevant specification tests recommended in Long
and Freese (2006), including checks that multicollinearity is not a problem here.
Binary logit model
To explore the factors associated with parental chauffeuring behavior, we relied on a
binary logit model. Our dependent variable, which is denoted by y, equals 1 if child i was
chauffeured to school by his/her parent who was surveyed, and 0 otherwise. The proba-
bility that child ‘‘i’’ was chauffeured to school by the parent surveyed is then given by
(Greene 2008).
Multinomial logit model
To analyze factors associated with children’s school travel mode, we estimated a multi-
nomial logit model for our dependent variable y, which can take three values: active mode
(walking or biking; A), car (C), or transit (including school bus; T). With this model, the
probability of mode m [ {A, C, T} compared to mode n [ {A, C, T}\{m} for child ‘‘i’’ is
(Long and Freese 2006).
Generalized ordered model
We estimated generalized ordered models to analyze factors associated with parental
attitudes toward children’s walking and biking to school. Parental attitudes originally
collected via a 5-point Likert scale were recoded into three ordinal outcomes captured by a
dependent variable y to obtain better balanced categories and to simplify our analysis: ‘‘not
an issue’’ and ‘‘a little bit of an issue’’ were merged into ‘‘1 = low concern’’; ‘‘somewhat
of an issue’’ was relabeled ‘‘2 = medium concern’’; and ‘‘very much an issue’’ was merged
with ‘‘a serious issue’’ into ‘‘3 = high concern’’.
    The generalized ordered model for choice q [ {1, 2, 3}, can be written (Williams 2006).
    Following Williams (2006), we explored different link functions for our generalized
ordered logit models. Based on the AIC and BIC information criteria (Greene 2008), but
also to simplify the discussion of our results when AIC and BIC differences between
models were under 3, we selected logit link functions. 
Results
Results, estimated using Stata, are presented in Tables 3, 4, 5 and discussed below. For
brevity, we report and discuss only OR [see the text below Eqs. (3), (6), and (9)] of
statistically significant explanatory variables (at 10 % of significance or less). Variables
with OR farther from 1.0 have more sway in changing the probability of an outcome than
variables with OR closer to 1.0.
Parental attitudes: effects of parental gender and other factors
We hypothesized that mothers have greater concerns for their children’s active commuting
to school; results in Table 3 partially confirm this hypothesis. Of the four issues pertaining
to children’s walking and biking to school, mothers are statistically more likely than
fathers to have higher concerns about traffic volume (OR = 1.32), but they do not seem to
have different attitudes toward distance to school, traffic speed, and crime when living
within 2 miles from school.
    Seraj et al. (2012) used the same dataset to analyze these parental attitudes focusing on a
smaller area of Southern California. Although our attitudinal models might look similar,
they do not discuss how parental gender affects parental attitudes. In addition, we went
further to explore how parental gender and attitudes interact to affect children’s school
travel mode and parental chauffeuring behavior (see ‘‘Children’s school travel mode:
effects of parental attitudes and other factors’’ and ‘‘Parental chauffeuring behavior:
interaction of parental gender and attitudes’’ sections).
    A number of other parental characteristics also matter for explaining parental attitudes
toward children’s walking and biking to school. Compared with parents aged 30–44, both
younger and older parents are less concerned about traffic characteristics (OR 0.46–0.79)
or crime (OR = 0.41). Asian and Hispanic parents, parents who were born in the U.S., and
parents who were interviewed in English all show higher concerns for at least one of the
four questions considered (OR 1.42–2.20). Moreover, parents with a high school degree,
some college, or a bachelor’s degree worry less about distance to school and traffic volume
than parents with less education or than highly educated ones (OR 0.61–0.69), while
parents who work full-time worry more about crime (OR = 1.44) and less about traffic
volume (OR = 0.78) than those who don’t.
    Parental use of active transportation or transit is statistically associated with parental
attitudes. Parents who walk or bike more often are less concerned about school distance for
their children (OR 0.47–0.77), but parents who use transit more often worry more about
traffic volume (OR = 1.35).
    A few household characteristics also influence parental attitudes: households with more
children are less concerned about traffic and crime (OR 0.81–0.89); households with an
annual income under $10 K worry less about traffic volume (OR = 0.52); and households
with a low to medium annual income ($10–$50 K) show higher concerns about crime (OR
1.43–1.73).
    Somewhat surprisingly, parents show no attitudinal differences when they consider
letting a daughter or a son walk or bike to school, but parents have greater concerns about
traffic characteristics (OR 1.31–1.33) for younger children (5–10 years old). However, our
results suggest, as expected, that the most important factor here is the distance between
home and school: when it is shorter, parents are less concerned about school distance and
traffic characteristics (OR 0.31–0.73). This implies that attending a nearby school could
reduce parental concerns and encourage children to walk or bike to school. We also note
that parents of children who attend public schools are more concerned about distance to
school (OR = 1.58).
    Of the land use variables we considered, parents worry less about crime when the
population density and the percentage of renter-occupied housing is lower (OR 0.19–0.56).
A lower percentage of renter-occupied housing also helps reduce parental concerns about
traffic volume (OR 0.60–0.66), but residing in cities over 1 million with subway or heavy
rail increases this concern (OR = 1.52).
    We supplemented the indirect land use measures above with walkability data from
walkscore.com. Consistent with previous research (e.g., Kerr et al. 2006; Napier et al.
2011), parents in more walkable communities worry less, but the corresponding practical
impact is very small and significant only for traffic volume (OR = 0.99). One possible
explanation is that the walkscore component that account for local amenities does not
matter here since the destination of a school trip is fixed.
Children’s school travel mode: effects of parental attitudes and other factors
Table 4 presents results from two models that explain children’s usual travel mode to and
from school. As in previous studies (e.g., Hume et al. 2009; Panter et al. 2010; Napier et al.
2011), parental attitudes significantly influence children’s school travel mode. When
parents are more concerned with school distance, traffic volume, and crime, their children
are less likely to walk or bike to and from school (OR 0.38–0.73). Interestingly, children
whose parents worry more about traffic speed are more likely to use transit than cars
(OR = 2.25), possibly because these parents’ perceived risk reduces their willingness to
drive their children from school.
    As expected, parental gender is not statistically significantly associated with children’s
school travel mode. This makes sense since only one parent per household was surveyed,
so the gender of the participating parent should not be correlated with the child’s travel
mode to school, assuming parents reached a joint agreement on that choice. However, since
parental attitudes significantly affect children’s school travel mode and since parental
gender affects parental attitudes, parental gender may still play an indirect role in deciding
children’s school travel mode, but understanding this link will require surveying both
parents in the household.
    Several other parental characteristics matter. Younger parents (18–29 years old) are
more likely to let their children travel to school actively (OR = 2.03), while Asian parents
are less likely to do so (OR = 0.57). Moreover, parents who have at most some college
education are less likely to let their children actively commute to and from school (OR
0.14–0.69) compared to parents with more education.
    Parental participation in active or transit transportation impacts children’s school travel
mode. When parents take more walk or bike trips, their children are more likely to actively
commute to and from school (OR 1.44–6.03). Likewise, children of parents who use transit
are more likely to take transit to school (OR = 2.13).
    Results for household characteristics suggest that children are more likely to walk or
bike from school when they have more siblings (OR = 1.51) or when their households
have a lower income ($10–$30 K, OR = 1.91). Moreover, children are less likely to take
transit to and from school when there are more cars than drivers in the household
(OR = 0.42), but they are more likely to do so in households with medium to higher
income ($50–$100 K, OR 2.51–3.59).
    As expected, child characteristics correlate with their school travel mode. Girls, younger
children (5–10 years old), and children who attend before and/or after school care are less
likely to walk, bike, or use transit to and from school (OR 0.13–0.79).
    Again, the actual distance from home to school seems to have by far the greatest impact
on children’s school travel mode. The shorter that distance is, the more likely children are
to walk or bike to and from school (OR C 2.44). We also note that children who attend
public school are more likely to actively commute or use transit for their school travel (OR
2.22–6.88).
    Finally, our models show that living in non-urban areas reduces the likelihood of active
commuting from school by children (OR = 0.56). In addition, living in neighborhoods
with a lower population density increases children’s transit use to and from school
(OR = 5.09–8.27), while living in neighborhoods with a lower percentage of renter-occupied housing reduces such use (OR 0.14–0.43).
Parental chauffeuring behavior: interaction of parental gender and attitudes
We also explored the role that attitudinal differences may play in the gender gap for
chauffeuring children to school; results are presented in Table 5. We estimated a restricted
model (which does not include parental attitudes) and an unrestricted model (which
includes parental attitudes) in order to gauge the impacts of parental attitudes on the
results.
    Note that the sample of both models contains only respondents whose children went to
school by car on their survey day because, as explained in the ‘‘NHTS data’’ section, we
found an extremely low parental escort rate for children who walked, biked, or took transit
to school. To obtain more robust results, we focused on parental chauffeuring behavior
instead. In other words, all children in both models were driven to school on their survey
day by either parents surveyed or by other household or non-household members. Our goal
here is to compare whether parental gender or attitudes are more important in deciding
parental chauffeuring behavior.
    Our results suggest that gender and attitudes are intertwined in influencing parental
chauffeuring behavior. Parental attitudes significantly affect parental chauffeuring
behavior: parents are more likely to chauffeur their children to school when they have high
concerns about traffic volume (OR = 2.15, in the unrestricted model). However, the extent
to which attitudinal differences can explain the gender chauffeuring gap is limited: the
odds ratio of mothers chauffeuring their children to school compared with fathers is even
slightly higher in the unrestricted model (OR = 2.99) than in the restricted model
(OR = 2.79) after adjusting for parental attitudes. This suggests that, when holding equal
concerns, mothers are still more likely than fathers to chauffeur their children to school,
which confirms that the division of household chauffeuring duties is gendered.
    As expected, parents’ characteristics affect their chauffeuring behavior. Younger parents (18–29 years old, OR = 0.22–0.23) as well as African-American parents (OR = 0.29,
only in the unrestricted model) are less likely to chauffeur their children to school, and so
do parents who work full-time (OR 0.35–0.39) compared to those who do not.
    Few household characteristics were found to be significant. In single parent (OR
11.69–12.51) and two-adult households (OR 2.21–2.61), the parent surveyed is much more
likely to be chauffeuring his/her child to school, but this was expected since these families
are more constrained than families with more adults in sharing chauffeuring duties (recall
that all children in the sample used to estimate this model were driven to school on the
survey day). Moreover, income matters: parents in households with an annual income
between $30 and $50 K are more likely to chauffeur their children to school (OR
3.52–3.59).
    Whereas actual distance to school was paramount in explaining parental attitudes and
children’s school travel mode, it has no impact on parental chauffeuring behavior. One
explanation is that children’s school travel mode is jointly decided with parental chauffeuring behavior, making the decision to select a parent or an adult household member for
the chauffeuring task irrelevant to school distance. Likewise, child and land use characteristics do not seem to affect parental chauffeuring behavior.
Conclusions
In this paper, we examined whether parental gender affects parental attitudes toward letting
their children actively commute to school, and how parental gender and attitudes interact to
influence children’s school travel mode and parental chauffeuring behavior. Our results
show that mothers usually have higher concerns about traffic volume, which in turn
reduces the likelihood that their children will walk or bike to school. Moreover, although
parents are more likely to chauffeur their children to school when they have higher concerns about traffic volume, mothers are still more likely than fathers to do so even when
mothers and fathers have equal concerns. Based on these results, we conclude that maternal
attitudes might matter more for children’s active commuting to school.
    These findings are relevant for two current programs that aim at increasing the number
of children who actively commute to school: the Safe Routes to School program, and the
Walking School Bus program. For the former, a national project that focuses on infrastructure improvements such as traffic signals and sidewalks, our results suggest measures
that can effectively reduce mothers’ perceptions of risk related to traffic volume. For the
Walking School Bus program, which seeks adults to volunteer walking a group of
neighborhood children to and from school, our results suggest targeting mothers when
recruiting volunteers and trying to address their concerns.
    Fostering active commuting to school by children is equally important to mothers.
According to a recent OECD report (2012), household chores, childcare, and looking after
aging parents are the main barriers to gender equality in employment. Our results provide
support for this viewpoint by showing that mothers bear most of the chauffeuring burden
not because they worry more but because chauffeuring children still appears to be more a
woman’s responsibility. The high level of space and time rigidity of such activities partly
explains why women are more likely to work part-time and work closer to home, which in
turn reduces their economic opportunities and does not allow them to take full advantage of
their education (OECD 2012).
    Lastly, our results have some implications for future research. In this paper, we estimated three sets of models to explain the relationships between parental gender, parental
attitudes, children’s school travel mode, and parental chauffeuring behavior. These links
have been ignored in the literature mainly because all current research (including ours)
relies on surveys that collect information only from one parent in each household (see the
‘‘Children’s school travel mode: effects of parental attitudes and other factors’’ section for
more details). As a result, the parental decision-making process regarding how children
commute to school and who is responsible for chauffeuring them cannot be elicited. To
advance our understanding of relevant issues, it is important to explore if these decisions
correlate with within-household gender differences in wages, attitudes, preferences, or
social norms. Future research could overcome current limitations by surveying both
parents.