Can outdoor activities and inquiry sessions change the travel behavior of
children and their caregivers? Empirical research in public preschools in
Sa~o Paulo (Brazil)

This manuscript seeks to evaluate changes in the travel behavior of young children (5–6 y/o.) and their care­givers 
following the implementation of a 4-month program in public preschools in Sa~o Paulo (Brazil) with a high
prevalence of low-income immigrants. The program was developed around two intervention types: i) weekly
inquiry sessions about urban mobility through the Philosophy with Children approach and ii) bimonthly outdoor
walking activities in the surroundings of schools. In this way, it was possible to observe positive changes in the
perceptions of children’s statements and in the social norms of their caregivers about transportation, as well as
significant modal shifts as reported by caregivers towards sustainable mobility, which were evaluated using
difference-in-differences and time-series analyses.
Besides the identification of changes in the behavior of adult caregivers through child-centered intervention
types, this empirical research enabled unraveling the effect of the proposed measures according to the child’s
gender, nationality, and level of social vulnerability, including the significant modal shifts towards walking and
cycling identified among caregivers of boys and out of car and motorcycle among those of native children, which
were significant both in post and follow-up measures.
In addition to contributions to the evaluation of school-based interventions with data from developing
countries, the discussions presented in this paper intend to provide insights into the role of early childhood and
perceptions in behavioral changes towards sustainable transport.

1. Introduction                                                                                     
												
Home-school trips made by children and youth represent a significant 
share of daily trips in several parts of the world. However, many                              
countries have registered a decline in children’s active mobility (e.g.                             
walking and cycling) in the last decades, which includes cities both in                                  
the Global North and the Global South, for instance 48% to 13% in the                               
United States between 1969 and 2009 (McDonald et al. 2011) and 70%                                  
to 49% in Sa~o Paulo between 1997 and 2012 (de Sa´ et al. 2016). This                               
phenomenon seems to be associated to the facilitated acquisition of                                 
private vehicles (Fyhri et al. 2011; Sa´ et al., 2014), the parental concerns                       
about traffic and stranger danger (McDonald et al. 2011), and to the                                
spatial distribution of schools as a result of bigger units and more children 
in private schools, which increases distance to school (Fyhri et al.                           
2011; McDonald et al. 2011). In this sense, schools and education                                 

policies can have a major role in promoting sustainable habits, including
the right to live in sustainable cities and to use clean transport modes.
This paper seeks to explore the mechanisms underlying changes in the
travel behavior of young children and their caregivers due to a set of
school-based interventions.
Previous research has identified the impact of interventions on
children’s physical activity and active commuting to school, although it
has tended to disregard younger children and the case of low-income
communities, especially in developing countries (Porter and Abane
2008). Furthermore, there is still much to be researched on the interaction 
between people’s perceptions and the reported travel behavior,
mainly related to participatory approaches to incorporating children’s
voices and the impact assessment of child-centered interventions on
adults. Finally, there is a limited number of studies evaluating the
interplay between different types of interventions, including the

differential impact of outdoor and in-classroom interventions on the
effectiveness of such programs.
This manuscript seeks to evaluate the changes in travel behavior
following the implementation of a 4-month school-based program
focused on: i) exploring the open public space in the surroundings of
schools through walking and ii) inquiring children about urban mobility
through the “Philosophy with Children” (PwC) participatory approach.
The research project was implemented together with 5 to 6-year old
children and their caregivers, between February and August 2019, in
public preschools in Sa~o Paulo (Brazil) with a high prevalence of lowincome 
immigrants.
Henceforward, the paper provides an overview of empirical studies
covering changes in the travel behavior of children, in section 2. Literature 
review. This is followed by the description of intervention types,
sources of data, and methods of data analysis, in section 3. Methods.
Subsequently, in section 4. Results the observed changes in the travel
behavior of children and their caregivers are presented, whose discussion, 
limitations and possible avenues for future research are presented
in section 5. Discussion and conclusion.

2. Literature review

The first empirical studies addressing behavioral changes in children
emerged in Medicine-related publications in the 2010s, with the evaluation 
of established programs to increase children’s active commuting
to school and decrease traffic congestion, namely the Walking School
Bus (Mendoza et al. 2011; Sayers et al. 2012) and school travel plans
(Hinckson and Badland 2011). These topics were further incorporated
by transport-related academic journals, which assessed the health benefits 
of active transport and injury reduction that were brought by cycle
training courses (Ducheyne et al. 2014), increased crossing guard
presence (Gutierrez et al. 2014), and school-based interventions
(Christiansen et al. 2014). These narratives were commonly embedded
with the belief that “reducing this dependence [of auto transportation]
at an early age may establish a lifelong pattern of active transportation”
(Sirard et al. 2015, p. 29).
The evaluation of such interventions covered a broad range of
school-based strategies, including obesity prevention programs (Xu et al.
2015), peer-mentoring about physical activity (Tymms et al. 2016),
lessons about active transport in a driving license course (Verhoeven
et al. 2016), and a variety of initiatives aiming to encourage active
commuting with children (e.g., cycle training, school travel plan, Safe
Routes to School). Many of them nonetheless reported no significant
effect of the implemented measures on increasing physical activity
(Harrington et al. 2018; Sayers et al. 2012; Tymms et al. 2016) or promoting 
walking or cycling to school (McMinn et al. 2012; Østergaard
et al. 2015; Teixeira et al. 2019), even when large-scale policy changes
were considered (Sirard et al. 2015). The lack of evidence of the interventions’ 
impact is reported predominantly among older children
(aged 11 and above), and no difference in effect across gender and socioeconomic 
position has been identified (Love et al. 2019).
However, other studies did identify a positive impact of the interventions 
among younger children (aged under 10 years old),
including the increase in active transport due to school travel plans
(Hinckson and Badland 2011), awareness raising activities (VillaGonza´lez et al. 2016), 
and the implementation of the Safe Routes to
School program (Hoelscher et al. 2016). Similarly, an intensification of
physical activity was noted among younger children as a result of other
school-based initiatives, namely the Healthy Choices Programme
(Shannon et al. 2018) and the Walking School Bus (Mendoza et al.,
2011).
Besides the paucity of intervention studies covering younger children
and teenagers, another limitation reported in the literature is associated
with the substantial heterogeneity and low quality of evidence across
studies, underscoring a need for stronger study designs in this area of
research (Larouche et al. 2018), which is still in an early stage

(Scho¨nbach et al. 2019). The search for robust studies includes the
consideration of panel research designs, longer follow-ups, standardized
outcome measures, and potential mediators of travel behavior change to
help refine current interventions (Larouche et al. 2018).
The papers reviewed for this manuscript were collected through the
ISI Web of Knowledge platform (apps.webofknowledge.com) on March
2020 and cover the topics “transport*” or “mobility”, followed by
“child*” and one of the following terms: “behavior change”, “behaviour
change”, “treatment group”, “control group”, or “causality”, totaling 10
different combinations. From the 410 publications originally collected,
only 18 involved empirical research in children’s physical activity or
urban mobility with children. From these, 13 works were excluded due
to the following exclusion criteria: no pre/post research design (n = 8);
no intervention (n = 3); and review article (n = 2). The two review articles 
obtained then provided 12 other studies involving pre-post
research with children and were included in the review process,
resulting in 17 papers, as presented in Table 1.
Most published research has been implemented in a set of countries
in Western Europe (mainly in the UK, Belgium, and Denmark) and in the
USA, with a varied sample size (min: 77, max: 13,631, median: 494) and
covering a wide age range (8 to 18 y/o.), with a prevalence of children
and adolescents aged between 8 and 14 years old. The majority of the
research approaches is school-based, with a widespread adoption of
questionnaires for data collection and a set of tools for analyzing data,
including regression models and other statistical tests to assess differences 
in the relevant metrics (e.g., t-test, F-test, Chi-squared test, odds
ratio).
Some studies that included control and treatment groups in their
research approaches acknowledged difficulties comparing intervention
schools with “business as usual” controls (Tymms et al. 2016), especially
with regard to the recruitment of public schools (Østergaard et al. 2015).
In this sense, other studies made adjustments by either categorizing
schools according to their funding allocation in infrastructure
(Hoelscher et al. 2016) or combining strategies from a baseline intervention 
(Verhoeven et al. 2016). These controlled evaluations, however,
were not limited to the effect of the proposed interventions on established 
measures such as the degree of active commuting to school and
the level of children’s physical activity, but have also included the
change in children’s perceptions towards active modes, including the
safety perception and motivation to walk (Villa-Gonza´lez et al. 2016),
attitude towards bicycling (Christiansen et al. 2014), and psychological
needs and autonomy-support from teachers (Shannon et al. 2018). In a
recent evaluation of the Walking School Bus program, Nikitas et al.
(2019) indicate that exploring perceptions and attitudes of both students
and adults (caregivers, teachers, etc.) about school travel can be
particularly helpful in expanding the understanding behind the uptake
of school-based interventions and their long-term viability.
A number of research findings have indeed acknowledged the mutual
influence between travel behavior and its psychosocial determinants,
particularly the attitude and perceptions towards using different transport 
modes (Kroesen et al. 2017; Line et al. 2010; Villa-Gonza´lez et al.
2016). These follow the usual assumption that attitudes influence
behavior (Janke and Handy 2019) and resonate with the reported associations 
of active transport and physical activity with parental perceptions 
on environmental characteristics (De Meester et al. 2014), as
well as positive cycling experience and negative attitudes towards cars
(Sigurdardottir et al. 2013). Some of these studies did not detect any
intervention effect on active commuting, but on “parental encouragement 
and student attitude towards bicycling” (Christiansen et al. 2014,
p. 175) and on creating “awareness and intentions of change” (Teixeira
et al. 2019, p. 20). That way, these studies support the assumption that
such psychosocial factors of active transport are “the first step in order to
achieve a change in behaviour” (Verhoeven et al. 2016, p. 1).
Despite being primarily implemented with children and school staff,
such interventions seem to also influence the behavior of other family
members, as does the positive parental attitude towards cycling due to a

course to improve children’s cycling skills (Ducheyne et al. 2014) and a                
school-based physical activity program (Christiansen et al. 2014). The                  
influence of children on the transportation needs of their caregivers is                
similarly found in research covering awareness activities about environmental 
characteristics (Villa-Gonza´lez et al. 2016), children’s independent 
mobility (Vlaar et al. 2019), and the impact of the children’s                  
development on the bicycling attitudes and behavior of caregivers                       
(Janke and Handy 2019).                                                                 
In effect, Nikitas et al. (2019, p. 485) acknowledge the role of                    
enhancing children’s “perceived safety, health, emotional and environmental 
value” as a way of optimizing school-based initiatives to                     
change children’s travel behavior. Here, the use of active discussion               

groups with young people has been successful (Shannon et al. 2018),
more suitable and less intimidating than quantitative methods (Line
et al. 2010). Nevertheless, the adoption of such qualitative research
approaches to acknowledge behavioral changes in commonly disregarded 
groups of children has been limited to a reduced set of
transport-related studies, including the situation of low-income populations 
(Shannon et al. 2018), children with migration background
(Scho¨nbach et al. 2019), and school communities in developing countries 
(Xu et al. 2015). Furthermore, there are few examples of participatory 
research methods tailored to children and youth in travel
behavior research, even though these approaches have been recognized
as drivers of “change in activity levels” throughout childhood (Tymms

et al. 2016, p. 5). That echoes a range of theoretical backgrounds            
demanding “new approaches that are more aware of social inequalities          
and diversity” and seeking to regard children as “subject of rights,          
participative, competent and socially active” (Sarmento et al., 2018, p.      
152). In this sense, it seems necessary to elaborate research strategies      
tailored to vulnerable children, particularly in a context of child poverty   
generated by the economic and financial crisis (Sarmento et al., 2018)        
and escalating transnational and rural-urban migration in the Global          
South (Davis 2006), which might strengthen the quest for effective interventions 
to promote sustainable mobility.                                  
										
3. Methods                                                                    
										
Two intervention types (inquiry sessions and outdoor walking activities) 
were implemented as part of a 4-month program in three public       
preschools within the Municipality of Sa~o Paulo (Brazil), between March      
and June 2019. The Municipality of Sa~o Paulo (also referred to as City of    
Sa~o Paulo) is one of the municipalities that compose Metropolitan Sa~o       
Paulo, which covers a surface of 7947 km2 and 21.6 million inhabitants        
distributed in 39 municipalities. The City of Sa~o Paulo itself accounted     
for 1521 km2 and 12.1 million inhabitants in 2018 (Emplasa, 2019;             
Estado de Sa~o Paulo, 2011). Being acknowledged for its “growing social           
and economic inequalities (...) embedded through high spatial                 
inequality” (Moreno-Monroy et al. 2018, p. 110), the context of               
Metropolitan Sa~o Paulo may also contribute to the development of the         
yet under-studied research agenda on the Global South concerning the          
travel behavior of children and their caregivers. In this study, only        
public preschools were considered as prospective sites for data collection 
and analysis. Furthermore, in the search for schools representative      
of the transport conditions encountered by preschoolers in Sa~o Paulo,        
the schools analyzed in this research were selected according to the          
“levels of mobility resources” as defined through the Capability              
Approach, indicating comparable “conditions to walk provided for the          
children and their caregivers” (Humberto et al. 2020b, p. 189).               
Baseline measures were collected with caregivers before the interventions 
(T1), after the interventions (T2) and in a two-month follow-up (T3). 
Data provided by children (aged 5–6 y/o.) consist of the             
sentiment orientation (positive to negative) of the children’s statements     
during the inquiry sessions as obtained using sentiment analysis              
(Humberto et al. 2020a).                                                      
The gathered data were analyzed by comparing the measures                 
delivered by children and their caregivers through a set of statistical       
tests, including time-series analysis (pre-post and pre-follow-up), difference-in-differences 
(accounting for time-series and differences due to     
the combination of strategies), and the stratification in relevant groups     
(gender, nationality, and level of social vulnerability). During the six-month 
period analyzed, no marked changes were observed regarding              
public security and transport conditions, including facilities for pedestrians, 
cyclists and public transport users. The description and context of
children and caregivers involved in this study are presented in section 4.    
Results.
										
3.1. Intervention types                                                       
										
The intervention types analyzed in this manuscript stem largely from      	
a joint research project among the University of Sa~o Paulo, the University 
of Lisbon and the non-government organization ape¯ - estudos em       
mobilidade (http://apemobilidade.org), which sought to assess the             
impact of both discussing and practicing active mobility in the school        
setting on the travel behavior of young children and their caregivers. To     
achieve this, a set of inquiry sessions about urban mobility (indoor) and     
educational activities through walking in the schools’ surroundings           
(outdoor) was implemented together with children and staff from the           
participating schools.                                                        
The outdoor activities consisted of walks either to a relevant destination 
located around the schools (e.g. library, museum, public garden,       

carpet factory) or in the neighborhood itself, which were proposed in
collaboration with the local NGO, whose projects seek to “arouse a
permanent curiosity in young people” as an “experience of education in
urban mobility” (Nogueira 2015, para. 8). As part of an education
project seeking to practice urban thinking through walking with children, 
the proposal is drawn throughout meetings organized for a month
before the day of the activity. The route planned is discussed together
with schoolteachers, in which the themes to be approached are discussed, 
including the “senses that can be discovered by the children’s
curiosity through the walking experience” (Walk 21 Vienna, 2015, para.
3). At the day of the outdoor activity, the children are oriented by a map
of the walking route, which proposes “stops in interesting points, such as
big trees, squares and colorful paintings on the walls”. (Walk 21 Vienna,
2015, para. 5). By stimulating the imagination and attention of children
“through the senses and questions about the urban space, the project
aims to present children and teachers as responsible commuters of the
public spaces they walk and to make the experience outside school
something comfortable and familiar” (Walk 21 Vienna, 2015, para. 5).
These educational activities lasted approximately one hour and were
applied every two months to 29% of the surveyed sample (N = 87
children from three classes).
The inquiry sessions were built on the concepts of the Philosophy
with Children (PwC) approach, which “thinks of philosophy not as
knowledge or content but as a relationship with knowledge and
thought” (Kohan 2015, p. 156). In this sense, the PwC approach focuses
on “creating the conditions to philosophize”, which means that everyone
sits in a circle, asks for the floor to speak and promotes the relationship
between the participants of the inquiry sessions (Kohan 2015, pp.
156–157). According to Gomes (2019), the “experiences of thinking”
proposed by the PwC practices promote the “possibility to change” by
affirming students’ and teachers’ different voices and following some
methodological steps, including the gathering of collective inquiries and
the identification of relevant themes and questions for further discussion
(Gomes, 2019, p. 34). A typical application of PwC involving younger
children up to seven years old incorporates the community ball to give the
“opportunity to call and be called upon by their peers” and sitting in a
circle, which “nurtures collaboration amongst the children, helping
them to be more focused on the topic”, creating a safe place for philosophical 
inquiry (Jackson and Oho 1993, pp. 6–10). Recent applications
of the PwC involving urban mobility include the discussion of “themes
related to mobility and permanence in the public space, such as going
from home to school, playing in the garden and going out to open
spaces” (Barreiros et al. 2019, pp. 183–184). In this study, a series of
eleven PwC sessions was carried out to address different dimensions of
urban mobility from the children’s point of view, whose detailed
description is provided by Humberto et al. (2020a). The inquiry sessions
were applied weekly to the entire sample (N = 299 children from nine
classes).

3.2. Data sources

Questionnaires were completed by the caregivers in three stages: i)
two weeks before the beginning of the PwC sessions (T1: pre); ii) at the
end of the inquiry sessions and outdoor activities (T2: post, four months
after T1); and iii) after winter school break (T3: follow-up, six months
after T1), covering a set of socio-demographic variables, the adopted
transport modes by children and caregivers, and descriptive social
norms towards active mobility as informed by the caregivers. The
questionnaires were filled out by parents during the project presentation
sessions throughout the school semester (65% of the questionnaires
delivered) and were sent home to parents who were unable to attend
these meetings (35% of the questionnaires delivered). In these presentation 
sessions no reference was made to a specific transport mode, even
though a minor proportion of the caregivers in the initial phase of the
project tended to associate the study with the lack of free school buses
offered by the municipal government. The project was named “Study on

the influence of the built environment on children’s mobility in Sa~o                       
Paulo” in official documents and pyta´ (“stay” in the Tupinamba´ Tupian                     
language) in short for children and schoolteachers. A more detailed                         
description of the variables collected in the questionnaires is provided in                 
Table 2.                                                                                        
In the case of data collected with children, the transcription of the                   	
inquiry sessions originally yielded a text corpus with 27,943 segments of
text. The comments of the participants during the PwC sessions (before                      
and after the first outdoor walking activity, T1 and T2) encompasses
both children and adults (school staff and participating researchers) and                       
can vary from short comments to long contributions to the discussions at                    
stake. Approximately one third (28%) of such segments were associated                       
to children whose caregivers answered the questionnaires, and 7% of                         
them (N = 1909) could be joined to the AFINN sentiment lexicon, which                       
estimates the polarity of pieces of text by classifying terms in integer                    
values between - 5 and - 1 for negative words and between 1 and 5 for                       
positive words, with a predetermined prevalence (65%) of negative                           
terms (Nielsen 2015). This includes polarity values for children’s                          
statements between - 3.000 and 4.000 once terms are reassembled in                          
the corresponding segments and divided by the segment of text’s word                        
count. In this sense, positive (or less negative) polarity values indicate                  
children’s statements with rather positive sentiments, and vice-versa. A                    
detailed description of the sentiment analysis used in this manuscript is                      
provided by Humberto et al. (2020a).                                                        
In order to supplement the data provided by caregivers (questionnaires) 
and children (transcripts of inquiry sessions), information about                   
the nationality of children and their caregivers was obtained using                         
school documents as provided by school staff. The description of these                      
variables is also presented in Table 2, as follows.                                         
The data on transport mode use (children and caregivers, as reported                        
by caregivers) were subsequently processed to represent the adoption of                     
active transport modes (walking or cycling) and motorized transport                         
modes (car or motorcycle) as a nominal variable, for instance adoption                      
of active transport (1) and non-adoption of active transport (0). As they                   
are derived from multiple response questions, these variables are not                       
mutually exclusive and therefore cannot be combined. The nationality of                             
Pre to post : Stage =         1 for T2; Pre to follow - up : Stage
the children surveyed originally contains ten different nationalities, but                           
null for T3.
for the sake of simplicity only native and non-native children are presented 
as alternatives in Table 2. Finally, the georeferencing of the                        
= null for T2;
children’s households as provided by the caregivers enabled the association 
with public datasets about the housing conditions, including the
determination of low, moderate and high levels of social vulnerability                          
(SEADE, 2012).                                                                              
The data collection and processing were approved by the Research                        
Ethics Committee of the Institute of Psychology at the University of Sa~o                   
Paulo (CEPH-IPUSP) on December 2018 (No. 3.092.675, CAAE:

03318918.0.0000.5561). The first author was part of the group of four
researchers that coordinated the data collection and the implementation
of the intervention types (inquiry sessions and outdoor walking activities) 
in the analyzed schools.
The methodology previously described is summarized schematically
in Fig. 1.

3.3. Time-series analysis and difference-in-differences

To handle the data from the questionnaires and inquiry sessions, two
analytical approaches for comparing the collected measures were
implemented: time-series analysis and difference-in-differences. While
both methods stem from quantitative methods commonly used in economic 
and health assessments for the estimation of policy effects, a
difference-in-differences analysis “compares the change in outcome for
an exposed group between a moment before and a moment after the
implementation of a policy to the change in outcome over the same time
period for a non-exposed group” (Hu et al. 2017, p. 4). Similarly, a timeseries 
analysis (also known as interrupted time-series) compare the
outcomes before and after policy implementation and differs from a
difference-in-differences analysis by not requiring a separate control
group (Ibid.).
In this study, the time-series analysis accounts for the differences in
the observed variables between the stages of the study (pre, post, and
follow-up, i.e., T1, T2, and T3), whereas the difference-in-differences
analysis regards the differences in the consecutive observations (T1,
T2, and T3) between the group of children exposed either to the baseline
intervention (inquiry sessions, I1) or a combination of interventions
(inquiry sessions + outdoor walking activities, I2).
In both approaches, the time is incorporated in the regression models
by examining the collected measures before the interventions (T1) and
in the following stages, i.e., pre-post (T1-T2) and pre-follow-up (T1-T3).
In the regression models, this is represented by defining the variable
Stage, as follows.
Similarly, the consideration of the intervention types is done by
comparing groups of children participating in both intervention types
(I2) or in inquiry sessions only (I1) by means of variable Group, for both
pre-post and pre-follow-up analysis, as follows.								
						                                 									
In this sense, differential effect of outdoor walking activities on									
travel behavior, as compared to the baseline intervention (I2 vs. I1), can									
be expressed by the variable StageGroup, defined as follows.									
StageGroup = Stage*Group                                                            									
Accordingly, the interest coefficient for time-series analysis is the
one related to the variable Stage, whereas in difference-in-differences             
analysis the interest coefficient is related to the variable StageGroup,
both indicated as ß3 in Fig. 2. In the results and discussion presented in              
the following sections, both coefficient and statistical significance (p-           
											
value) are observed to evaluate the changes in travel behavior of children 
and their caregivers due to the interventions implemented, which
are further stratified by the most sampled groups of gender, nationality
and level of social vulnerability according to questionnaires and statements 
during the inquiry sessions. The methods for processing the
collected data are largely based on a set of tools from the tidyverse
package within R software (version 3.6.1), an environment for statistical
computing and graphics (Wickham and Grolemund 2017).

4. Results

The assessment of the proposed interventions is based on the
abovementioned empirical research project implemented in three public
preschools in the city of Sa~o Paulo (Brazil). Despite being located within
a region known as the “Expanded Center” (Centro Expandido) that concentrates 
most of the jobs and public facilities in the municipality
(health, education, transport, culture, etc.), the surroundings of the
analyzed schools are characterized by poor housing conditions and the
concentration of low-income immigrants working in the clothing and
textile sector, predominantly from Bolivia (Pucci 2013).
The location of the analyzed schools and children’s households can
be found in Fig. 3, which indicates a context with a high share of active
travel by younger children to and from school, coupled with a situation
of precarious housing in the regions where most of children and caregivers 
surveyed live. The lower shares of active trips in the other zones
within the Expanded Center are noticeable, which seems to point out to
spatial inequalities related to children’s mobility that are found in the
interplay of the analyzed region with its surroundings, where better
transport services and employment opportunities overlap with the
spread of slums and squatter settlements. Similarly, a more detailed
contextualization of schools and the location of children’s households is
provided as supplementary materials, namely regarding the location of
other public preschools (Fig. SM-1), the location of rapid transit stations
(Fig. SM-2), the share of motorized school trips of preschoolers and
primary school-aged children (Fig. SM-3), the share of active and

motorized trips of their caregivers (Figs. SM-4 and SM-5), the average                    
monthly household income (Fig. SM-6), and the location of slums and                       
squatter settlements across Sa~o Paulo (Fig. SM-7). The descriptive statistics 
of the collected data can be found in Table 3.                                    
The children surveyed seem to present a share of active school                        
commuting above the city’s average, mainly girls, non-native children                     
and those living under high social vulnerability, as presented in Table 4.                

On the other hand, the percentage of motorized school travel (car or
motorcycle) is also above the city’s average in the households analyzed,
which may indicate a lower adoption of other transport modes, such as
the school bus, railway and the city bus to access schools, notwith­
standing the greater availability of public transport facilities in the region 
in relation to Metropolitan Sa~o Paulo as a whole (cf. Fig. SM-2 in
Supplementary materials). In contrast, the children’s caregivers present

lower share of active trips and higher share of motorized trips when                     
compared to the whole municipality. The children affected by both                        
intervention types (I2) have a more active modal share in accessing                      
schools and seem to be less vulnerable than the other children, which                    
can be related to the profile of caregivers who allow children to attend                 
outdoor activities with no parental participation.                                       
Regarding the participation in the inquiry sessions, represented by                  
the number and the polarity of statements during the PwC sessions, the                   
prevalence of native and least vulnerable children is remarkable, even                   
when considering the larger sample size of these groups. Moreover, girls                 
and children under low social vulnerability present the most positive                    
polarities among other groups. On the other hand, the negativity of the                  
statements made by non-native and more vulnerable children is also                       
outstanding.                                                                             
Regarding the modal shifts throughout the implementation of the                      
intervention types (pre, post and follow-up), no major changes can be                    
detected in the way children access schools, as shown in Fig. 4. With                   

initial measures (T1) largely oriented towards active modes, especially
in the group of children combining intervention types, changes in children’s 
travel behavior are hardly noticeable, both for active and
motorized modes of transport. None of the modal shifts related to children’s 
transport were statistically significant when comparing the periods 
analyzed, as indicated in Table 5. On the other hand, the reported
impact on caregivers towards sustainable mobility (increased adoption
of active modes and decrease in motorized transportation) seems
considerable, notwithstanding their indirect role in the proposed interventions: 
greater use of active modes and reduced adoption of
motorized modes, particularly in pre-post analysis, with relatively sustained 
effects on follow-up measures. Similarly, the modal shifts reported 
by the caregivers were statistically significant in the decrease of
motorized transport use between T1 and T2 and in the increase of active
transport use for both T1-T2 and T1-T3, as indicated in Table 5. Both
effects seem to be more pronounced among caregivers whose children
attended both outdoor walking activities and inquiry sessions.

Apart from the observed changes in the travel behavior of children                
and their caregivers, it was also possible to observe whether there were              
any variations in the perceptions that might follow or trigger behavioral             
changes in urban mobility (see Fig. 5). Whereas caregivers were asked to              
complete a statement regarding their perceived frequency of children’s                
walk share to school throughout the stages of the study (pre, post and                
follow-up), the polarity of children’s statements was obtained by asso­ciating 
the transcripts of the inquiry sessions with a sentiment lexicon              
(before and after the first outdoor walking activity). There was a positive           
impact on the social norms of caregivers in all groups, particularly                  
considering the follow-up measures, although caregivers whose children                    
have been involved in both intervention types (I2) seem to have had                   
greater increases in their perceived walk share of transport to school.               
Positive changes in children’s perceptions (polarity of statements during             
inquiry sessions) were statistically significant between T1 and T2,                   
whereas the increases in the descriptive social norms (by caregivers)                 
were significant when comparing the follow-up measures with the other                 
periods analyzed (T1-T3 and T2-T3), as indicated in Table 5.                          
This phenomenon points to early findings that seem relevant, as it                
seems to demonstrate an effect of the inquiry sessions (baseline intervention) 
not only on the direct beneficiaries (children), but especially on           
their caregivers, who were not directly involved in any other intervention 
seeking to change their behavior throughout the project. The fact of            
discussing urban mobility per se seems to have led parents to think that                  
more children were walking to schools, although this topic was not                    
mentioned in the inquiry sessions or in the interactions with the caregivers 
to complete the questionnaires. In addition, the children’s active             
modal share to school, predominantly composed by walking, has                         
remained constant along the stages of the project.                                    
For some of the measures collected, the identification of changes due             
to the intervention types seems straightforward, including the unvarying              
modal shares among children to access schools towards both active and                 
motorized modes. However, in addition to the observed changes                         
throughout the project (T1 vs. T2 and T3) and between the intervention                
types (I1 vs. I2), it is necessary to examine the respective statistical              
significance in order to consolidate a careful evaluation, also considering 
stratified evaluations by gender, nationality and level of social               

vulnerability. In this sense, a set of variables related to children (polarit
of children’s statements during the inquiry sessions) and caregivers
(share of active/motorized transport and descriptive social norms) is
examined more thoroughly in Table 6, following the analytical approaches 
employed: time-series analysis and difference-in-differences.
Accordingly, the statistical significance of the changes shown in
Figs. 4 and 5 can be observed in column “All children” of Table 6 and
Table SM-1 (Supplementary materials), which were evaluated between
the periods analyzed (Time-series) and also considering the differences
between both groups (I1 and I2) and periods (Difference-in-differences).
For time-series analysis, significant modal shifts towards active
modes were found among caregivers in both pre-post (T1-T2) and prefollow-up 
(T1-T3) tests, while for motorized modes this seems only
applicable to pre-post analyses. In contrast, the increase in social norms
was more significant in the follow-up measures, which may be linked to
a possible triggering effect of modal shifts observed in the post-intervention 
period. With regard to the stratified analyses, it was not
possible to detect any differential effect of the observed changes due to
the child’s gender, nationality or level of social vulnerability, although
more pronounced modal shifts towards sustainable mobility (especially
out of car and towards walking and cycling) were reported among
caregivers of boys and less vulnerable children, particularly between T1
and T2.
On the other hand, analyses considering the differential effect of the
intervention types over time identified fewer widespread changes.
Higher modal shifts to active modes and out of motorized transport were
statistically significant in the post-intervention period among caregivers
of children in both intervention types (I2) as compared to those in the
baseline intervention (I1). In the follow-up measurements, however, this
appears to be significant only in the decrease of the motorized modal
share. Caregivers of boys seem to have had a greater differential impact
of outdoor walking activities on their increased adoption of active
transport, both in post and follow-up measures. Among caregivers of
native children, on the other hand, this differential impact seems to be
more pronounced in decreasing their share of motorized transport only.
Additionally, a positive impact on social norms was only observed
among the less vulnerable households. This outlines possible indirect

effects of interventions on adults, which seem to be mediated by a range              
of socioeconomic factors such as the child’s gender and social                        
vulnerability.                                                                        
In general, more positive comments by children were noticed over                  
time, with no marked gender, nationality or social vulnerability bias.                
However, once the effects of outdoor activities are taken into account,               
there are small positive variations in the polarity of children’s statements 
(especially among the less vulnerable ones), which nevertheless                 
are not statistically significant.                                                    
											
5. Discussion and conclusion                                                               
											
In this manuscript, the evaluation of changes in perceptions and                  
travel behavior is introduced following the implementation of a 4-month               
program in public preschools in Sa~o Paulo (Brazil). To do this, the                  
impact of two intervention types on young children (5–6 y/o.) and their               
caregivers was tested: i) weekly inquiry sessions about urban mobility                

through the Philosophy with Children approach (299 children); and ii)
bimonthly outdoor walking activities in part of the sample (87 children).
In this way, the impacts of discussing (inquiry sessions) and practicing
urban mobility (outdoor walking activities) with young children were
observed both on children and their caregivers. As a general result, it
was possible to observe that the act of discussing urban mobility as such
seems to have a significant impact not only on the perceptions of children 
(polarity of statements) and caregivers (social norms), but mostly
on the reported modal shifts of caregivers towards sustainable mobility,
even if they were not direct beneficiaries of the interventions.
The minor variations in children’s modal share to access schools
seem convergent with children in this age group, whose travel choices
are relatively stable (Panter et al. 2013). This converges in a way with
the findings by Teixeira et al. (2019), whose tested interventions “were
able to create awareness and intentions of change” but needed “more
extensive activities throughout time” to effectively change travel
behavior (Teixeira et al. 2019, p. 13). However, both inquiry sessions

and outdoor walking activities here analyzed over a five-month period
seem to have contributed to alter the reported travel behavior of caregivers 
and certain perceptions of children and their caregivers (polarity
of statements during the PwC sessions and social norms, respectively).
Moreover, the methods adopted have provided an opportunity to deepen
qualitative research designs by capturing the perceptions of preschoolage 
children (up to 6 years old) using their own words (Humberto
et al. 2020a). In this sense, they seek to bridge the gap of previous
research on the influences on travel behavior intention, which has
“relied heavily on eliciting information via survey questionnaires and
interviews using the researcher’s words” (Line et al. 2010, p. 239).
The major role of the intervention types identified here does not
preclude nevertheless the effective role of physical changes in the urban
environment in changing and shaping sustainable mobility behaviors,
which require a “high degree of political involvement and support”
(Christiansen et al. 2014, p. 180) and may be well combined with soft
interventions. The integration of initiatives focused on perceptions and
attitudes into transport projects might therefore be effective in: i)
changing “car use intentions and willingness to accept car restrictions”
(Sigurdardottir et al. 2013, p. 1); ii) mitigating “gender inequities in
transport cycling” (Bourke et al. 2019, p. 64); and iii) promoting “wellplanned 
natural experiments focusing on AST [active school transportation]” 
based on the “engagement of local authorities [that] can
form the basis for solid knowledge of promoting active transportation
for the generations to come” (Christiansen et al. 2014, p. 180). In this
research, even though outdoor walking activities and inquiry sessions
did not have the encouragement of sustainable mobility as a common
objective, the changes observed towards active modes in both behavior
and perceptions seem to have occurred primarily as a result of the
experience in the participatory debates in the classroom, which in some
cases had their effects reinforced by participating in the outdoor walking
activities around schools.
However, a thorough analysis of the changes identified is needed, as
the difficulties in reaching new levels for sustainable mobility may be
influenced by different baseline values. A first consideration refers to the
high share of pedestrian trips by children in accessing schools, which is
above average for the city of Sa~o Paulo and might explain the modest
modal shifts identified towards active modes. Among the caregivers,
with an active modal share below the city average, significant modal
shifts were identified in two directions: i) a 45% increase in the adoption
of active modes, which was sustained in the follow-up, and ii) a 12%
decrease in motorized transport use, notwithstanding a mild recovery
after the winter school break (T3), with greater reductions among
caregivers whose children were involved in both interventions (I2). This
rationale can be similarly applied to the stratified analyses, where the
most prominent modal shifts analyzed were observed in groups with the
lowest active modal shares (caregivers of boys, native children and those
in low social vulnerability), possibly with greater likelihood of shifting
to active modes compared with girls or vulnerable children, for instance.
Once these changes are acknowledged, one should inquire about the
factors that seem to determine such shifts in the perceptions and
transport modes, i.e., how the cycle of these changes is unfolded. The
findings of this study may be useful to observe the impact of encouraging
dialogue and the practice of urban mobility with children on the
perception of their caregivers, which in turn changed their mobility
behavior. However, how can the cycle of behavior change in urban
transport be understood considering the child-caregiver relationship?
Have children’s statements during the inquiry sessions at school been
raised in discussions back home and directly influenced their caregivers’
travel behavior? Or had children’s statements affected at first the
caregivers’ social norms and thereby changed their travel behavior?
Could a reinforcement loop towards more active mobility be triggered
by such school-based interventions?
This debate is convergent with the positive impacts on the family
environment and the social-emotional development of children that are
promoted by the Philosophy for/with Children inquiry approach by

increasing “organic and sincere dialogue between parents, teachers and
students” (Papathanasiou 2019, pp. 22–23). It is also in line with interventions 
in the field of environmental education in schools, in which
programs “received by children indirectly influenced their parents in
recycling paper, plastics, and tin cans” (Evans et al. 1996, p. 243). This
points out that even children this young, who still rely on their caregivers 
for many activities, have agency and constitute a culture of their
own to discuss relevant transport-related aspects, besides having the
potential to promote behavior change in their households. This indicates
the significant role of children as social actors and of childhood as a
social category, which resonates with Sarmento et al.’s (2018) critique
on the “ideas about ‘vulnerability’ and ‘innocence’ usually attributed to
childhood”, whose acknowledgment might endorse a “renewed vision of
childhood such as those related to agency, childhood cultures, public
policies for childhood and social practices, and institutional settings for
children” (Sarmento et al., 2018, p. 136).
These considerations suggest possible lessons for the evaluation of
child-centered interventions in the transport domain, particularly with
regard to the role of perceptions and early childhood in behavioral
changes involving school-based interventions towards sustainable
transportation. First, the perceptions seem to indicate triggers for
behavior change and might be the starting point for future measures,
converging with the suggestion brought by Gutierrez et al. (2014)
regarding the “prioritization towards engaging in and acknowledging
safety before physical activity” (p. 116) to promote active transportation
with children. Furthermore, the participatory and pragmatic aspect of
combining discussion and practice with children may overcome the
challenges found in shifting parental attitudes, such as the ones found by
Ducheyne et al. (2014) in cycle training with children, where “multiple
efforts might be needed to change parental attitudes” (p. 59). In this
manuscript, changes in both descriptive social norms and travel
behavior were identified in the caregivers, even though they were not
the direct beneficiaries of the proposed interventions.
In addition, although no significant increase in active modal share
has been identified among children to access schools, this positive
impact has been detected in the reported travel behavior of caregivers.
This observed effect may unravel intra-household interactions beyond
the monodirectional influence of adults on children and indicates potential 
pathways for the impact assessment of school-based interventions 
on sustainable habits. Furthermore, this may also disclose
the possible impact of parental behavioral changes on children, such as
the primary focus on “attitude and behaviour change among parents to
grant children more freedom” suggested by (Vlaar et al. 2019, p. 8) to
design “future interventions to increase children’s territorial range”
(Ibid.). Finally, the context of Brazilian public schools analyzed in this
study may also contribute to the yet under-studied research agenda on
the Global South with regard to the travel behavior of children and their
caregivers.
Evidently, it is difficult to claim (nor was it the objective of the
present research) that long-term effects may persist in this group of
children and caregivers involved in these interventions, particularly in a
context of large-scale economic and social repercussions brought by the
COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Still, it would be of particular importance
to assess the persistence of the gaps identified between children from
different nationalities and social vulnerability levels, as well as to verify
whether the impact of these interventions at an early stage are somehow
correlated with permanent changes in behavior, such as the significant
influence of school-age physical activity on adult physical activity
identified among 9 to 18 year old children (Telama et al. 2005). In
addition, the quarantines enforced by the spread of the novel coronavirus 
might prompt long-lasting changes in the travel behavior and social 
norms related to urban mobility, since the COVID-19 pandemic has
implications in many spheres relevant to transport issues, including
school closures, occupation of public places, changes in work routines,
family organization, and isolation, leading to feelings of insecurity and
avoidance of crowds (Brooks et al. 2020; Ornell et al. 2020).

5.1. Limitations and further research

Nevertheless, this study presents some limitations and considerations
must be underscored. Similar to other empirical qualitative research,
there is a concern of social-desirability bias, whose mitigation was
pursued through the adoption of the PwC participatory approach, which
seeks to build the “experiences of thinking” from the children’s questionings, 
in which the participating researchers seek to intervene only to
gather collective questions and inquiries and to select themes to keep
discussing in the following inquiry sessions (Gomes, 2019).
Additionally, there is a risk of recall bias in the methods adopted due
to the adoption of self-reported measures provided in the questionnaire
to caregivers. However, the information collected from caregivers addresses 
common events such as the usual means of transport and the
current perception of pedestrian mobility. Data from children were
gathered using a long-running qualitative research design, in which
children have more time to recall and elaborate on change, especially
when compared to self-administered surveys that are commonly appliedin travel behavior research (Janke and Handy 2019).
Possible idiosyncrasies associated with each of the participating
schools were not considered, which may have omitted possible particularities 
of each school to promote active mobility. In addition, the
distinct role of walking and cycling within active mobility was not
considered, which may have overlooked possible singularities associated 
with the population groups analyzed. Finally, this study draws on
the caregivers’ statements to measure the modal shifts identified, which
may present some limitations regarding the accuracy of these measures,
possible biases (for instance literacy level), and the comparison of effects
between children and caregivers, as the variables related to transport
use that are collected throughout the study (T1, T2, and T3) refer to
school trips for children and “during the week” for caregivers. As other
limitations, the reviewed studies did not include manuscripts that were
not written in English, which may result in incomplete representation of
the relevant literature.
The methods of data analysis also present some limitations, mainly
related to the adopted approaches (time-series and difference-in-differences) 
and the lack of a randomized controlled trial research
design. In time-series analysis, other events occurring around the time of
the intervention can be a source of confounding, whereas in the
difference-in-differences approach the analyses are highly susceptible to
confounding due to between-group differences (Bernal et al. 2019).
Besides acknowledging the inability to control possible contemporaneous 
events during the school semester, the heterogeneity in the
walking conditions was sought to be minimized through the selection of
public schools with similar conditions to walk as calculated by Humberto 
et al. (2020a, 2020b). Still regarding the analytical approaches
adopted, this study could benefit from the adoption of other statistical
tests such as hypothesis testing, odds ratio, and structural equation
modelling. In addition, the difficulties faced by most public schools in
developing countries complicate the implementation of research designs
without providing clear benefits to the participating schools, i.e.,
including them as control schools. Similar challenges have also been
identified in studies conducted in wealthier countries (Hinckson and
Badland 2011; Østergaard et al. 2015; Shannon et al. 2018).
Finally, several factors relevant to pedestrian travel behavior were
not considered in this study, in which the association with walkability
measures might be of considerable value. These might comprise traditional 
measures in the field such as land use, sidewalk width, traffic
safety, existence of meeting places, and vigilance perception by pedestrians 
(Bradshaw 1993; Moura et al. 2017), as well as other relevant
measures relevant to cities in the Global South, including public lighting
conditions, existence of vacant lots and narrow passages (for instance
stairways and alleys), and pedestrian flow density (Harkot et al. 2017).
To develop further studies, some suggestions can be outlined: i)
evaluate the direction of the observed changes (polarity of children’s
statements and caregivers’ travel behavior and social norms) using

appropriate analytical tools (e.g. structural equation modelling); ii)
consider the effects of the proposed intervention types concerning the
mode of transport (rather than only active/motorized) and the nationality 
of children (instead of aggregating non-native nationalities into a
single group); iii) evaluate the effects observed through other statistical
tests such as hypothesis testing and odds ratio; iv) conduct follow-up
measurements one year later; v) inclusion of treatment and control
groups in further applications using a randomized controlled trial; vi)
test the impact of the intervention types in schools with lower shares of
active mobility; vii) include other under-researched age groups, principally 
adolescents in secondary school settings; and viii) assess the
combined impact of interventions directly addressing the engagement of
parents.