Built Environment and Walking to School
Findings from a Student Travel Behavior Survey
in Massachusetts

Thousands of communities across America now promote walking and
biking (active commuting) to school as a mechanism to increase physi-
cal activity, reduce traffic congestion, and improve air quality. Distance
to school and attributes of the built environment are crucial factors in
a child’s mode choice, and some of the most difficult determinants to
influence with programmatic interventions. Further understanding
the built environment’s role may help in assessing a school’s mode shift
potential and more effectively planning and implementing strategies
that increase walking and biking to school. Based on a student travel
behavior survey of 18,713 responses from 105 schools in Massachusetts,
a multilevel model was used to investigate the effects of route, neighbor-
hood, and school characteristics on walking to school. The model results
indicate that the built environment affects the odds of walking to school.
Specifically, short routes along less-trafficked streets with mixed land
use are associated with the increased odds of children walking to school.
Investigating these built environment characteristics of the route, neigh-
borhood, and school through a multilevel model, the study created a
framework for examining between-school differences in walk-to-school
rates, while controlling for built environment factors of the school and
student body. A potential application for this work is to compare walk-
to-school rates across heterogeneous schools and contextualize schools’
baseline walk share, set appropriate and measurable mode shift goals,
and track their progress over time.

The percentage of children who walk or bike (active commute) to
school in the United States has dropped from 48% in 1969 to only
13% of students in 2009, while the percent of kindergarten through
Grade 8 students driven to school increased to 45% (1). At the same
time, there have been declining levels of physical activity, a rise in
childhood obesity, and growing car dependence across the country
(2–5). Evidence suggests that active school commuters engage in
more physical activity than passive commuters do, and are more
likely to meet the recommendations for daily physical activity (2, 6).
K. Ito, Metropolitan Area Planning Council and Tufts University, and T. G. Reardon,
Metropolitan Area Planning Council, 60 Temple Place, Boston, MA 02111.
M. C. Arcaya, School of Architecture and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139. S. Shamsuddin
and S. Srinivasan, Department of Urban and Environmental Policy and Planning,

Most walking and biking programs in the United States fall under
the umbrella of Safe Routes to School (SRTS). SRTS seeks to pro-
mote activities that reduce traffic and air pollution around schools
and make walking and biking to school an easier, safer choice (7).
The SRTS program faces multiple challenges. SRTS interventions
can only affect the mode choice for children who live close enough
to walk or bike to school. Across most studies, distance to school is a
crucial factor in a child’s mode choice (2, 8–10), so a school’s mode
shift potential and actual impacts can only be properly understood by
controlling for the distance and attributes of the built environment.
SRTS programs must work within the context of the school’s built
environment—not a factor that can easily be changed by an SRTS
program. Therefore, by further understanding the role of the built
environment, SRTS programs and school administrations may more
effectively implement strategies that increase walking and biking to
school, and more accurately evaluate the success of those strategies.
However, less is known about the influences of the built environ-
ment on mode choice among children, particularly along the route
to school (10, 11), compared with evidence on the built environment
and adult walkability (10).
This analysis used a Massachusetts student travel behavior survey
to investigate the role of the built environment as a determinant of
walking to school. Specifically, the study investigated route-, neigh-
borhood-, and school-level characteristics associated with walking
to school. The study used a data set of 18,713 geocoded student
travel behavior survey responses from 105 schools (an average of
~178 survey responses per school). The results of the model suggest
evidence that the built environment affects the prevalence of walk-
ing to school. Short routes along less-trafficked streets with mixed
land use are associated with increased odds of children walking to
school. Moreover, the model provides a useful method for com-
paring walk-to-school rates over time and among heterogeneous
schools, and can provide performance metrics that control for built
environment factors beyond the control of the SRTS program.
Factors Affecting School Travel

Much of the literature on active commuting to school focuses on

individual and social characteristics. Male, Latino, and black chil-
dren, and those of lower socioeconomic status, are more likely to
engage in actively commuting to school (2). Having siblings is also
associated with higher rates of walking and biking for high school
students, but there is no significant effect for elementary students

(12). Internationally, evidence suggests that car ownership is associ-
ated with less walking and more driving to school (13). However,
studies in the United States are less uniform. Some studies have found

a negative association between car ownership and walking to school
(11, 13); others have found no statistically significant relationship
with household vehicle availability (14, 15). Whether children engage
in active commuting to school is consistently associated with paren-
tal perceptions. Common parental concerns include neighborhood
safety, traffic, distance to school, and busy schedules (2, 8, 9).
Children have fewer transportation options and are generally
more dependent on their parents and household context (10). Con-
sequently, the evidence in child-focused studies is more mixed than
in adult studies. Intersection density, a common measure of network
connectivity, has been found in some studies to be positively asso-
ciated with walking and biking to school (16–18), but negatively
associated with active school commuting in other studies (13).
Another built environment route measure used in previous studies is
the directness of the route. Route directness is typically measured as
the ratio of the straight-line distance from home to school to the net-
work distance from home to school (17). Three studies have found
that more indirect pedestrian routes were associated with walking
to school (13, 17, 19). Although adult commuting may be strongly
influenced by travel time, children’s travel may be more strongly
influenced by traffic safety concerns; therefore, parents and children
may seek less trafficked routes that are less exposed to traffic (13).
Children who live in urban areas are more likely to commute
actively to school than children living in rural areas (2). However,
there is no clear connection between mixed land use and children’s
commuting to school (10), although increased land use mix—which
increases the number of potential destinations accessible by foot—
is commonly associated with higher rates of walking among adults.
Timperio et al. (13) and Schlossberg et al. (17) excluded land use mix
from their studies due to its weak connection to school commuting.
McMillan (15) and Frank et al. (18) found that the land use mix
around the school was a positive predictor of walking, and Larsen
et al. (10) found that the land use mix along the route to school was
a negative predictor of walking; however, these studies defined land
use mix in different ways.
Real and perceived traffic safety risks are important in shaping
child commuting behavior. Perceived traffic safety is commonly
cited as one of parents’ primary concerns about whether children can
take an active form of transportation, especially young children (20).
Despite this perception, for actual crashes, McDonald et al. found
that riding with a teenage driver is the most dangerous mode on a
per trip basis (21). Several previous studies have examined the pres-
ence of major roads as a proxy for real and perceived traffic safety
(13, 17, 22). In general, crossing or walking along major roadways
is negatively associated with walking to school (13, 17, 19). Thus,
some previous school commuting route studies have used pedestrian
networks comprising on- and off-road facilities (10, 19, 23).
Finally, the relative location of the school, as measured by indica-
tors such as shorter distances to school and greater population density
in the immediate area of the school, have been linked with higher
active commuting rates (2). However, the research on school enroll-
ment appears to be mixed. Braza et al. (16) found a negative asso-
ciation between school size and active commuting; Ewing et al. (11)
found no significant relationship.

Data

Student Travel Behavior Survey

This analysis used data from an SRTS student travel behavior sur-
vey developed by the Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC)
79
in 2011, which is now administered by MassRIDES, a division of
the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (DOT). The sur-
vey was administered to schools with an SRTS program. Schools
distributed the survey to parents online, on paper, or both. The online
version of the survey is available at www.masaferoutessurvey.com.
From 2011 to October 2015, there were 24,571 survey responses
from 185 pre-kindergarten to Grade 12 schools in Massachusetts.
The survey collected the following information from parents about
each student in the home: grade enrolled in school, nearest street
intersection to the home, travel mode to school on most days, and
travel mode from school on most days. If respondents commuted by
car, they were asked whether the driver continued to (or was return-
ing from) work or another destination (a chained trip). Respondents
provided information about the number of vehicles in the household
and the number of licensed drivers. Based on these data, the ratio
of cars to licensed drivers in the household was calculated. Google
drive distances were also provided with these data.
The study investigated the built environment characteristics of
the route, neighborhood, and school that were associated with walk-
ing to school. The analysis was constrained to responses within a
2 mi walking distance of the school, which was consistent with past
research as a typical distance threshold for active commuting. The
analysis was also constrained to schools that had more than 35 sur-
vey responses. In addition, the study excluded responses from par-
ents reporting children in Grades 9–12, due to the low proportion
of the sample coming from this grade category (164 responses, or
<1% of the survey responses). Finally, due to a low sample size of
bicyclists (148 bicyclists, or ~3% of active commuters), the analysis
was limited to only walkers. The final analysis was conducted on
the remaining sample of 18,713 survey responses obtained from
105 schools.

School and Neighborhood Data

The American Community Survey 2010–2014 five-year block group
estimates were used to estimate average population density and
median household income for the school neighborhood. For the route
to school, an area-weighted average population density and median
household income were calculated by estimating the area of the block
groups that intersected the 50-m buffer around the route.
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Educa-
tion school and district profile data were used to find the overall
school enrollment for the year the survey was administered, pro-
portion of low-income students, race or ethnicity of the student
body, and proportion of English language learners for each school.
School demographic data were from the academic year 2013–2014,
because this was the most recent year for which data on all variables
were available.

Methods

Geographic Information Systems Neighborhood

and Route Delineation
There are relatively few route-based SRTS studies. Therefore, the
study drew from methods from Timperio et al. (13) and Schlossberg
et al. (17), two of the seminal articles on a geographic information
system (GIS) approach to the shortest travel route along the street
network in the walk-to-school literature. Both studies used GIS to
map the shortest route via the street network and examine variables

based on these routes, assuming the child took the shortest route.
However, neither study investigated land use mix along the route.
Larsen et al. (10) built off this methodological foundation and cre-
ated a 50-m buffer around the routes to calculate an entropy measure
of land use mix within this buffer.
The survey data were geocoded to the nearest intersection to the
home with ArcGIS 10.3. The network analyst extension was then
used to find the shortest route to school for each survey response.
The underlying network used in this study was a pedestrian network
comprising roadways with sidewalks on one or both sides of the
road, low-volume residential roads (< 1,000 vehicles per day), and
off-road facilities. This network was also used to create half-mile
school walksheds (the walking distance via the network) to define
the school environment or neighborhood. These geographic units
(route and school walkshed) were used to calculate neighborhood
and route characteristics for the analysis.

Land Use Measures

To explore land use mix, the study used the Massachusetts Land Parcel
Database developed by the MAPC. The Massachusetts Land Parcel
Database is a statewide atlas of more than 2.1 million land parcel
boundaries and associated tax assessor data (24). The database was
used to calculate an entropy measure of land use mix between four
land uses: residential, commercial, recreational, and institutional
land. Land use mix was calculated along a 50-m buffer corridor along
the route with the following equation:

Scores range from zero to one, with zero representing all land in a
corridor as a single land use and one representing an even distribu-
tion of all four land use classifications. In addition to land use mix,
percentage of industrial land use was calculated separately along the
route, to explore land use preferences along the route. Approximately
two-thirds (12,562) of the routes did not have industrial land use.

Road Measures

Several measures of network connectivity were used. The num-
ber of intersections and number of intersections with major roads
along the route were calculated, as well as intersection density
per kilometer squared of the school neighborhood. Data on road
intersections came from the 2013 Massachusetts DOT roads layer.
Major roads are defined by the Massachusetts DOT as roads with a
functional classification of 1-4 (i.e., highways, major arterials, and
collector roads).
The study also used the directness of the pedestrian route as
another measure of network connectivity. For this analysis, this
measure was defined as the ratio of the pedestrian route distance to
the Google driving distance. There were some differences between
the pedestrian route distance and the Google driving distance.
Google driving directions provide drivers with the fastest route,

which may route them more on major roads, while the pedestrian
routes only include off-road facilities, low-traffic-volume streets,
and streets with pedestrian infrastructure. The ratio was standard-
ized so that ratios where the drive distance was greater than the
walk distance (or ratios less than 1) were the same distance from
1 as ratios where the walk distance was greater than the drive
distance. In addition, any ratios between 1.1 and 1/1.1 were con-
sidered to be the same distance (pedestrian route distance = drive
route distance). The majority of data were the same distance (57%
had the same distance, 32% had shorter pedestrian distance, and
11% had longer pedestrian distance than driving distance). The
ratio was restricted to double the ratio in either direction. Approx-
imately 2% (325 responses) were outside this range (-2 to 2).
Finally, the study calculated the percentage of major route mileage
to the total route mileage.

Data Analysis

A multilevel model was useful in estimating active travel, because
the survey responses were socially and spatially grouped within
schools (Figure 1). The null model had a between-school varia-
tion of approximately 1.401 and a variation partition coefficient
of nearly 30%. Therefore, a single-level model would violate the
independence assumption of standard ordinary least-squares regres-
sion models. Multilevel models can handle individual explanatory
variables and school-level explanatory variables, by allowing the
residual variance to be partitioned into between-group and within-
group components (25, 26). Therefore, the study used the binomial
glmer command to predict walking to school (1) or not (0), to fit
a two-level random intercept logistic model (individuals within
schools). The study used R to conduct the analyses.
Partially adjusted models and a fully adjusted model were estimated. 
The partially adjusted models were used to examine the effects
of the built environment measures separately, while adjusting for the
hypothesized confounding effects of grade, year, household cars per
driver, and distance to school. Then a fully adjusted model was con-
structed where variables were retained in the model based on a statisti-
cal significance of =0.05 and if the direction of the effect was expected
and consistent between the partially and fully adjusted models. The
study also examined the correlations between the model variables,
the
and all associations were less than 0.55. Two models were created
for walking to school and walking from school.
After constructing the final fully adjusted model, the authors
conducted a sensitivity analysis of the fully adjusted model, by
removing the school with the most responses (841 responses), to
see whether schools with large survey responses were skewing the
model results.

Results

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the survey responses by
the travel mode to and from school from 18,713 survey responses
from 105 schools. The mode splits to and from school were similar. 

Approximately 4,835 respondents (26%) walked to school
and 5,032 (27%) walked from school. There were very few bicy-
clists in the sample. Biking accounted for approximately 1% of
the sample to and from school. Consequently, children bicycling
to school were not analyzed further. Personal vehicles were the
dominant mode share to and from school. Of the 46% of respon-
dents who drove to school, 67% were dropped off on the parent’s

route to work or at another destination. Of the 41% who drove
home, 60% were picked up. The average distance to school was
approximately ¾ mi. Finally, approximately 45% of the respon-
dents had children in Grades 2 to 4, and 70% owned at least one
car per licensed driver.
Most survey responses came from the Boston metro region, New
Bedford, and Worcester areas (Figure 2). Survey responses by school
ranged from 35 to 841 responses, with an average of 178.5 responses
per school. Approximately half of those living within a half-mile
of the school walked. However, those who were driven in personal
vehicles made up a large portion of the mode share across all half-
mile distance categories. Approximately 82% of the survey responses
were paper responses.

Partially Adjusted Models

Partially adjusted models were estimated to ascertain the magnitude
and direction of effect for each indicator individually (Table 2).
All indicators were tested in the partially adjusted models while
adjusting for the hypothesized confounding effects of year, grade,
distance, and household cars per driver. Similar to previous research,
distance and walking along major roads were significantly negatively

associated with walking, and indirect pedestrian routes and inter­
section density around the school were significantly positively asso-
ciated with walking. Land use mix along the route, a less commonly
explored indicator, was also significantly associated with walking.
In addition, school enrollment was positively associated with walking.
The number of intersections along the route; percentage of industrial
land use along the route; population density along the route and in the
school neighborhood; and school-level measures of the proportion of
low-income students, race or ethnicity of the student body, and the
proportion of English learners were not significant predictors.

Fully Adjusted Model

Table 3 summarizes the results of the final, fully adjusted multilevel
model predicting whether children walked to school. With the partially 
adjusted model as a guide, measures of interest were added and
examined for a statistical significance of p = .05 and a consistent
direction of the effect between the partially and fully adjusted models.
On average, students whose route had greater land use mix and a
more indirect pedestrian route compared with a driving route had
greater odds of walking to school, compared with more uniform land
use and a more direct driving route, adjusting for all other factors.
Routes with a greater portion of major roads decreased the odds of
walking to school, adjusting for all other factors.
The fully adjusted model explained about half of the residual
variance in the propensity to walk to school at the school level,
compared with the null model. After adjusting for the covariates, the
model had a variance partition coefficient of approximately 15%.
Thus, 15% of the residual variation in the propensity to walk to
school is attributable to unobserved school characteristics.

Discussion

This analysis investigated a unique data source to add to the relatively
few studies that have simultaneously analyzed route, neighborhood,
and school characteristics associated with walking to school. The
study found evidence that built environment features of the neighbor-
hood, route, and school affect walking behavior to school. In particu-
lar, short routes along less-trafficked streets with mixed land use were
associated with increased odds of children walking to school.
Consistent with previous research, the study found that older chil-
dren, especially those in Grades 5 to 8, were more likely to walk to
school (27), and that greater distance to school, vehicle ownership,
and higher proportion of major roads on the route were negatively
associated with walking to school (10, 13, 17, 19, 23, 27). Moreover,
this analysis demonstrated that busy roads were a barrier to walking
to school even if pedestrian infrastructure was present. This finding
suggests that even if pedestrian facilities are present, the parent or
child still may prefer to avoid busy roads. Furthermore, the study
investigated a novel measure of route directness, by examining the
ratio of walking distance to the Google driving directions, to examine
a network-based measure of directness. This investigation found that
less-direct pedestrian routes were positively associated with walking
to school. Previous studies reported the same finding (13, 17, 19).
Combined with the finding of the effect of major roads on odds of
walking to school, it is possible that children and parents may go out
of their way to seek out a less-trafficked route to walk to school (13).
Although this study had many similarities to previous research,
the analysis investigated some measures that are unique or seldom
looked at in the literature. Contrary to some previous studies, the
land use mix along the shortest walking route to school was a positive
predictor of walking to school. At first glance, this finding is surpris-
ing, because the literature on walking to school has found that cor-
relates of adult walking behavior, such as population density and
land use mix, are unlinked to school travel behavior (11). Therefore,
few studies have investigated this measure, and they have reported
mixed findings (10, 15, 18). Moreover, the entropy measure of land
use mix is a crude measure that depends on the land use categories
used to define it. Nevertheless, land use mix, as defined in this study,
had a modest positive effect on walking to school. This finding could
be indicative of living in a more walkable environment. The finding
provides new evidence and warrants further study.
Surprisingly, school enrollment was the only significant and influ-
ential school-level predictor. The study found that larger schools were
associated with walking to school. Larger schools may be sited in
urban or densely populated areas of communities, where walking is
more feasible. Other studies have found that schools with a greater
percentage of students in the free and reduced price meals program
were associated with a greater likelihood of walking to school (28).
However, this indicator, along with the proportion of students who
were English language learners and the proportion of the student
body that was not white, were not significant in the model, even after
the study looked specifically at the 2013–2014 school year. This find-
ing may indicate a lack of heterogeneity in these variables among
the schools, and represent a common feature of schools that opt into
the SRTS program in Massachusetts.

Limitations

The study analyzed a large cross-section sample of survey responses
from a unique student travel behavior survey. The survey is admin-
istered to SRTS programs in Massachusetts, to investigate route,

neighborhood, and school characteristics associated with walking to
school in a school with an SRTS program. Because of the cross-section
design, the study could not infer causality to the observed relation-
ships. The study assessed the usual travel mode to and from school,
so the findings do not elucidate any temporal or weather-related
relationships.
The analysis was limited to survey responses within 2 mi of school.
Approximately 20% (4,880) of the survey respondents lived beyond
that cutoff point. However, the mode shift goal for those who live
more than 2 mi from school may be different (i.e., encouraging bus
ridership, carpooling, or remote drop-off zones).
The data contained an unknown number of sibling pairs, which
threatened artificially shrinking confidence intervals around the
parameter estimates. To assess the potential for this limitation to
bias the results, the study ran a sensitivity analysis on online survey
responses, which had the added benefit of capturing whether the child
had a sibling. The results were consistent with the main findings.
School administrators administered the surveys. Therefore, there
was variability in the survey response rate by school, which affected
the representativeness of the survey of the school as a whole. Further-
more, the school student body changes from year to year. Although
the study controlled for year in the model, the analysis used all the
data from 2011 to 2015, and there may have been changes in the
students and schools during that time.
The routes used in this study were generated from responses from
the travel behavior survey. These routes were based on the shortest-
path algorithm on a pedestrian network comprising roadways with
sidewalks on one or both sides of the road, low-volume residential
roads (< 1,000 vehicles per day), and off-road facilities. Thus, it was
assumed that the child’s probable route may have been the shortest
route with some pedestrian infrastructure; however, this may not have
been the child’s actual route. This pedestrian network also would not
include all shortcuts, such as routes that cut through properties. Fur-
thermore, the route was based on an intersection near the home, and
not the actual home location. In addition, route directness has not
been calculated with network-based distances. The drive distance
was based on Google driving directions. Because only the Google
drive distance was reported in the survey data, the study did not deter-
mine what the actual network route was. In future studies, the Google
drive route could be compared with the pedestrian network route, to
explore what is truly being captured in this measure.
There are strong influences on children’s walking-to-school
behavior that were not included in this analysis. This was apparent
in the model, in which approximately 15% of the residual variation
in the propensity to walk to school was attributable to unobserved
school characteristics not in the model. Therefore, although it is
important to understand the built environment context, additional
study is required to understand why schools, after one controls for
the built environment context of the school and its survey responses,
have high or low walking rates.

Next Steps

This analysis provides evidence that built environment features of
the route, neighborhood, and school affect walking to school. The
study found that short routes along less-trafficked streets with mixed
land use were associated with increased odds of children walking
to school. With a multilevel model, the study was able to parse out
individual built environment predictors of walking to school, while
controlling for school differences. Although the study confirmed that
the built environment has a strong effect on walking to school, there
are many influences on children’s walking-to-school behavior that
were not included in this analysis. Still, it is important to control for
built environment characteristics, to understand what types of SRTS
interventions may be effective.
An application of this analysis is to evaluate Massachusetts SRTS
programs. This framework could be used to compare and contextualize
schools’ baseline walk share, set appropriate and measurable mode
shift goals, and track their progress over time. This is an exciting
prospect, because there has been little evaluation of SRTS programs
across the country (6). After accounting for route, neighborhood,
and school environment variables in a multilevel model, the study
saw a significant improvement in prediction, compared with the null
model. In other words, accounting for built environment variables
helps make schools more comparable, but there are still other ran-
dom effects (nonbuilt environment factors) that make schools differ-
ent from one another (e.g., school programs and policies). With this
study as a framework, a potential application of this work would be
to create built environment benchmarks that could be integrated into
the student travel behavior survey to contextualize and understand
why schools, after one controls for the built environment context of
the school and its survey responses, have high or low walking rates.
These findings should encourage schools to engage in additional
infrastructure (i.e., traffic calming and complete streets policies) and
noninfrastructure strategies (i.e., walking school bus programs). Such
strategies would aim to improve the real and perceived route environ-
ment, by slowing and reducing traffic and incentivizing more chil-
dren to commute actively. The data source and methods explored in
this study provide a framework that could be used to compare and
contextualize Massachusetts SRTS schools’ baseline walk share, set
appropriate and measurable mode shift goals, and track their progress
over time.