Incorporating the extended theory of planned behavior in a
school travel mode choice model: a case study of Shaoxing,
China
     ABSTRACT                                                                                  
     Travel to and from school can have social, economic, and                                  
     environmental implications for students and their parents.          
     Therefore, understanding school travel mode choice behavior is
     essential to find policy-oriented approaches to optimizing school        
     travel mode share. Recent research suggests that psychological                 
     factors of parents play a significant role in school travel mode                     
     choice behavior and the Multiple Indicators and Multiple Causes
     (MIMIC) model has been used to test the effect of psychological
     constructs on mode choice behavior. However, little research has
     used a systematic framework of behavioral theory to organize
     these psychological factors and investigate their internal
     relationships. This paper proposes an extended theory of planned
     behavior (ETPB) to delve into the psychological factors caused by
     the effects of adults’ cognition and behavioral habits and explores
     the factors’ relationship paradigm. A theoretical framework of
     travel mode choice behavior for students in China is constructed.
     We established the MIMIC model that accommodates latent
     variables from ETPB. We found that not all the psychological
     latent variables have significant effects on school travel mode
     choice behavior, but habit can play an essential role. The results
     provide theoretical support for demand policies for school travel.
Introduction
In recent years, children’s travel behavior, including active school transport (AST, such as
walking and cycling), has attracted the substantial attention of researchers from varying
disciplines, such as urban planning, transportation, and public health. Previous studies
have shown that those who often walk or cycle to and from school are much more
active than those who are driven and have more knowledge regarding their neighborhood
environment (Mackett 2013). Research is also reported that AST plays an important role
in promoting children’s physical activity and has the potential to prevent and reduce childhood obesity (Mendoza et al. 2011). Furthermore, AST can not only contribute to children’s physical activity levels but also have positive impacts on children’s mental and
psychological health (Fusco et al. 2012). In addition, it was estimated that as much as
10–14% of morning traffic is generated by parents driving their children to school (McDonald et al. 2011). Similar trends have been documented in developing countries. It has also
been found that, in Beijing, traffic congestion indices can rise from 3–6 to 6–9 points in the
2 weeks before and after school begins (above 6 means moderate or severe congestion) and
the capacity of three-lane roads around schools will drop by 38% under the influence of
student shuttle vehicle trips (Shi and Jiang 2014). The problem caused by this traffic congestion on roads near schools may create hazardous conditions for children using non-motorized means and increase emissions from automobiles that will contaminate the
air that children breathe in and around their school.
    Despite AST’s significant health and environmental implications, there has been a
decline in AST over the past few decades internationally (Buliung et al. 2011; Witten
et al. 2013). For example, in the United States, the rate of AST declined from 47.7% in
1969 to 12.7% in 2009 (McDonald et al. 2011); in Australia, the share of children aged
5–9 who walked to school decreased from 57.7% in 1971 to 25.5% in 2003 (Van der
Ploeg et al. 2008).
    In order to reverse the declining trend of AST, it is necessary to understand the
motives of the mode choice decision in school travel behavior. An emerging literature
has explored school travel behavior with a wide range of factors, which have largely
focused on five major aspects: (1) built environment including home–school distance,
neighborhood walkability, and other urban form elements; (2) social environment
related to perceived crime danger, child safety, and neighborhood socioeconomic
status; (3) school characteristics referring to a school’s size, policies, and location; (4)
household characteristics including the number of cars owned, licensed drivers, household income, children’s gender and age, and ethnicity; and (5) psychological concepts
such as attitudes, preferences, intentions, beliefs, values, and norms. A detailed discussion of factors influencing school travel can be found in a number of systematic reviews
(cf. Pont et al. 2009; Wong, Faulkner, and Buliung 2011; Mitra 2013; Larouche et al.
2014; Lu et al. 2014).
    According to these reviews, most literature has focused on a subset of alternative
modes, while few have been related to a complete coverage of the alternative modes. In
China, the electric bike has achieved impressive sales but few studies have taken it into
consideration as one of important school travel modes. Figure 1 used data on school-going children aged 6–18 from the 2012 Shaoxing Household Travel Survey. Because
there may be more than one adult in a household, it is possible for a non-driving adult
to have children in the household use other modes to travel to school. Therefore, a proportion of children are driven to school for each type of commuting mode of adults.
    From Figure 1, we can see that the proportion of children being driven to school is
higher for adults choosing a car as commuting mode (40%), compared with adults
using other commuting modes. Moreover, the figure illustrates that the proportion of
household children walking to school is only 30% for adults commuting by car, while
the proportion is 52% for adults walking to work and 47% for adults using a bike. It is
interesting that the electric bike almost shares the same proportion (25%) as bus users
for household children’s school travel when adults go to work by electric bike. To our
knowledge, this may be the first study involving the electric bike as one of the alternative
modes for school travel.
   Despite the explanatory variables or factors mentioned above for modeling school
travel varying from study to study, these previous studies highlighted the importance of
including adult household members’ activities in analyzing children’s school travel
pattern (Deka 2013; Susilo and Liu 2015). For example, Deka demonstrated through
Heckman probit models that children’s travel mode to school is influenced by parents’
travel mode to work, while the relationship is mostly unidirectional. It was also suggested
that future studies should consider the travel pattern of household adults when predicting
children’s mode to school (Deka 2013). McDonald (2008) examined the influence of parental employment status and work travel time on children’s travel to school by using a
binary logit model and found that young children (aged 5–14) with mothers who
commute to work in the morning are less likely to walk or travel by bike to school, but
only walk and bike modes were taken into consideration. Yarlagadda and Srinivasan
(2008) used multinomial logit model (MNL) to analyze the influence of parents’ employment and work flexibility on children’s mode use. He and Giuliano (2015) focused on children aged between 5 and 18 years living in dual-earner households, and bundled together
both parent’s working arrangements and spatial variables to model by MNL escort-mode
decisions about school travel. They found that the parents’, especially the mother’s,
increased working hours and more distant job locations result in an increased likelihood
of several alternative escort modes. Other studies have paid attention to the characteristics
of parents’ influence on how children travel to school (Wen et al. 2007; Faulkner et al.
2010; Yoon, Doudnikoff, and Goulias 2011). All these studies recognized that the travel
patterns of children and adults in a household are interrelated, but only a limited literature
involved the adults’ characteristics of commuting travel patterns comprehensively, such as
adults’ mode, commuting time, and psychological factors toward modes. Although a
growing body of research illuminates the significant effects of a wide range of individual
psychological factors on adult travel behavior, such as convenience, attitudes, and perceptions regarding environmental protection (Walker and Li 2007; Zeid 2009), there is a
limited literature that has examined how these factors affect children’s travel behavior.
In addition, theoretical frameworks from literature reviews regarding active travel in youth
and children’s trip to school do not appear to have fully integrated psychological factors
with built environment and social influences (McMillan 2005; Panter, Jones, and van Sluijs
2008). In addition, some researchers have suggested that prominent psychological constructs such as attitudes, beliefs, and social norms have not been explored sufficiently in
school travel research (Sirard and Slater 2008) and previous studies that considered
psychological factors may have lacked theoretical grounding or used theories superficially.
    The most widely applied model of the cognitive determinants of choosing travel modes
is the theory of planned behavior (TPB), which suggests that behavior is most closely
determined by an intention to act (Ajzen 1991). Intentions are based on a combination
of attitude toward the behavior, subjective norm (SN), and perceived behavioral control
(PBC). Intention has a direct effect on behavior and, under some circumstances, the
same applies to PBC. The theory recognizes the importance of background factors, such
as personality, emotions, education, age, gender, and past experience; although if they
affect behavior, it would be via beliefs. The TPBs sufficiency assumption is invalid; in
other words, intention may be determined not only by attitude, SN, and PBC but also
by more additional variables (Ajzen 2011). In this study, descriptive norm (DN) and
habit as additional predictors of intention and behavior in TPB were examined, because
the two variables have provided sufficient evidence to satisfy Ajzen’s criteria of adding predictors in other behavior domains (Rivis and Sheeran 2003; Gardner 2009; Ajzen 2011).
We use the extended theory of planned behavior (ETPB) as a systematic framework of
behavioral theory to organize psychological factors of household adults that have significant effects on school travel mode choice behavior and investigate the role of these factors
on the process of school mode choice by the Multiple Indicators and Multiple Causes
(MIMIC) model.
    The purpose of this paper is to gain a deeper understanding of children’s school travel
behavior by addressing the gaps mentioned above. Specifically, we propose an ETPB to
delve into the psychological factors caused by the effects of adults’ cognition and behavioral habits and determine their relationship paradigm. The paper is organized as follows:
the next section describes the data collection process and data used in the research followed by a section presenting the MIMIC model and the estimation results; the paper
ends with a customary section of conclusions.
Data and analysis
Data description
The empirical analysis of this paper was carried out with data from the 2012 Shaoxing
Household Travel Survey. The paper-based survey was conducted in October 2012 in
Shaoxing, Zhejiang Province, China, with an area of 1191 km2, a population of 1.03
million, and 128 traffic analysis zones. The data-set from the survey provided household,
personal, and travel characteristics for 32,364 individuals from 11,290 households. These
individuals of all ages and for various purposes made 70,091 trips including school travel
by children and commute travel by adults. The data used for this paper were restricted to
those households that had at least one child aged between 6 and 18. Adult workers aged
between 18 and 24 who might be students but who also made occasional work trips were
excluded. Note that only one adult in a household with children answered the attitudinal
questions toward various travel modes. We took five school travel modes into consideration: walk, bike, electric bike, bus, and auto drive. Other modes, such as taxi, were eliminated because they accounted for less than 5% of all school trips. After extensive data
cleaning and filtering, the final data-set for this paper included 1873 respondents.
    In the final data-set, the proportion of children walking to school was 33%, which is the
largest, compared to bike with 11%, electric bike with 17%, bus with 21%, and car with
18%. The greatest difference of school mode share between male and female children is
related to electric bike – 14% of male children use electric bike to school compared to
17% of female children. Among adults in the household, about 36% of males drive to
work compared to 23% of females, 8% of males walk to work compared to 12% of
females, 16% of males use taxi compared to 4% of females, and 30% of males use electric
bike compared to 43% of females.
Selection of variables
Since the objective of this paper is to consider household adults’ commuting travel patterns
in relation to children school travel mode choice, the commuting travel patterns of household adults with children are measured by adults’ commuting mode, commuting time, distance from home to workplace, and their attitude towards commuting modes. Other factors
that have an impact on children’s school travel mode choice behavior are also included in
the paper. The independent variables are divided into five groups: (1) household adults’
commuting travel pattern; (2) household adults’ social demographic; (3) household
adults’ psychological perception about commute modes; (4) children’s social demographic;
and (5) children’s school travel behavior. All these variables are listed in Table 1.
    A number of dummy variables have been included. For example, a dummy variable for
household income was introduced with the expectation that children from higher income
households would be more likely to go to school by car and less likely to take bus, walk, or
cycle. Whether a household has more than one child aged between 6 and 18 was regarded
as a dummy variable with the expectation that having more children in a family would
increase the likelihood of walking or cycling to school. The number of cars, bikes, and electric bikes in a household were regarded as exogenous variables in models in this paper with
the expectation that vehicle type has a positive significant influence on the same school
travel mode.
    Children’s school travel is related to their age and gender, as well as household characteristics. The age of children is constantly reported to have a strong association with the
likelihood of AST (McDonald 2008; Johansson et al. 2012), that is, older children are
more likely to go to school by active travel modes, such as walk and bike. Children’s
gender may also affect school travel behavior. Adults in a household are likely to be
more concerned about the travel safety of girls (Zwerts et al. 2010).
    Distance from home to school is a critical variable that plays an important role in children’s school travel mode choice. Previous studies have reported that children are less
likely to walk or cycle to school when distance increases (Babey et al. 2009; Emond and
Handy 2012).
    Attitudes toward three travel modes were accessed by a combination of behavioral
beliefs and outcome evaluations. Initially, respondents were solicited to rate the
consequences of using the three travel modes, creating three different behavioral beliefs on
a five-point scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree), in relation to the extent to
which using that particular mode would improve their fitness level, making them feel
free and relaxed. Subsequently, the importance of each of the consequences was evaluated
on a five-point scale (1 = not at all important to me, 5 = very important to me) to give the
outcome evaluations. Before combining the behavioral beliefs and outcome evaluations
into measures of attitudes toward the three modes, positive consequences were recoded to make sure those higher values on all behavioral beliefs indicated a more positive
belief. Take attitudes towards electric bike, for example, a principal components analysis
identified just one component accounting for 86% of the variance (eigenvalue of 1.72) with
a Cronbach’s alpha (a) of 0.84, indicating a strong inner consistency.
     Two types of social norm were measured by two indicators for both SNs and DNs. For
SNs, the items ‘My best friends consider using the electric bike/using the bus/using the car
to be … ’ and ‘My family/relative consider using the electric bike/using the bus/using the
car to be … ’ was assessed on a five-point scale ranging from completely unacceptable to
completely acceptable. The items were re-coded so that a high value indicated a stronger
SN. Take electric bike, for example, here a principal components analysis identi<U+FB01>ed a
single coherent component, accounting for 83% of the variance (eigenvalue of 1.66)
with a Cronbach’s alpha lower than that for intention (a = 0.80) but still indicating a
strong internal consistency.
   DNs were measured by the items ‘My closest friends will themselves use the electric
bike/use the bus/use the car’ and ‘My family/relative will themselves use the electric
bike/use the bus/use the car’ and rated on a five-point scale from strongly disagree to
strongly agree. After re-coding the items, a high value indicated a strong DN. Again, principal components analysis of DNs on electric bike revealed one component accounting for
79% of the variance (eigenvalue = 1.57) with a Cronbach’s alpha indicating moderate
internal consistency (a = 0.73), again in line with expectations for such a belief-based
aggregate.
   Direct measures of PBC were used, including three items for each mode: (i) ‘It’s mainly
up to me whether I choose the … travel mode or not’; (ii) ‘To use the travel mode on my
ordinary trip is difficult’; (iii) ‘It will make me feel troubled to choose the travel mode’. All
three items were evaluated on a five-point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly
agree. Subsequently, the items were re-coded so that a higher value indicated a higher PBC.
These items for electric bike formed one component in a principal components analysis
accounting for 66% of the variance (eigenvalue = 1.33) with a Cronbach’s alpha (a) of
0.50, indicating reasonable inner consistency. Nunnally and Bernstein (1967) suggest
that a = 0.70 represents a strong inner consistency, but Cortina (1993) urges researchers
to consider the number of items used – a moderate alpha with a small number of items
may well represent better internal consistency than a larger alpha with a larger number
of items (Rhodes, Plotnikoff, and Spence 2004). Ajzen (2002) suggests that a requirement
for high internal consistency for belief-based measures is not necessary, given that it is the
aggregate of differing beliefs that forms an attitude. The principal components analysis
showing that the aggregated variable forms a unitary component is an important justi<U+FB01>cation for aggregation.
   Behavioral intention was assessed separately for different travel modes by way of three
items: (i) ‘It is likely that I will choose the … travel mode in the future’; (ii) ‘I would expect
to use the travel mode next time’; and (iii) ‘Within the next coming one month I have the
intention to use the travel mode’. All items were evaluated on a five-point scale (1 = com-
pletely impossible, 5 = completely possible). After re-coding the items, a higher value signified a stronger intention to use that particular travel mode. A principal components
analysis identified just one component accounting for 85% of the variance (eigenvalue
of 1.71) with a Cronbach’s alpha (a) of 0.82, indicating a strong inner consistency.
   Habit was measured using a 10-item version of Verplanken and Orbell’s Self-Report
Habit Index (Verplanken and Orbell 2003). Each item related to ‘Choosing the travel
mode on the … trip’ (e.g. ‘Choosing the electric bike on the commute trip is something
I do automatically’ and ‘Choosing the electric bike on the commute trip is something I
do without having to consciously remember’) was measured on a five-point scale (1 =
strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree; Cronbach’s a= 0.90).
   The indexes of reliability and validity are shown in Table 2.
Model and estimation
In order to examine the complicated interrelationships among the TPB’s latent variables of
adults and children’s school travel mode choice with the socioeconomic status variables,
an MIMIC model is estimated. In terms of the multivariate regression of indicators on
causes, the model implies restrictions of two types: (i) the regression coefficient matrix
has a rank of one; and (ii) the residual variance–covariance matrix satisfies a factor analysis model with one common factor. The MIMIC model is in fact a special form of structural equation modeling. 
    Estimation of a structural equation latent variable model minimizes the difference
between the sample covariance matrix S, and the covariance matrix S. The elements of
S are hypothesized to be a function of the parameter vector <U+03B8> so that S = S(u). The parameters are estimated so that the discrepancy between S and the implied covariance
matrix S(u^ ) is minimal. The discrepancy function, F = F(S, S(u)), measures the discrepancybetween S and S(u) evaluated at u^ . Fmin is the minimum value of the discrepancy
function and equals zero only if S = S(u^ ). An indication of model fit is, therefore, given by
the closeness of the Fmin to zero. We suppose that the disturbances are all mutually independent. 
    As illustrated in Figure 2, the MIMIC model includes demographic characteristics of
travelers, the latent variables that construct the expand TPB and endogenous observed
indicators. Specifically this model hypothesizes that the socioeconomic variables influence
all latent variables of TPB, which are also explained by indicators from questionnaires for
respondents. Figure 3 presents the detailed path analysis diagram, which specifies the
hypothesized relationships among the latent factors, where ellipses represent unobservable
variables and rectangles represent observable indicators. Dashed arrows represent
measurement equations while solid arrows represent the structural equations. The
latent variable model describes the relationships between the latent variables and their
indicators and causes.
    The MIMIC model simultaneously estimates the measurement equations relating each
factor to its indicators, and the structural equations specify the relationships among latent
factors and between them and socioeconomic status variables. The estimation of the
MIMIC model was conducted in STATA. Table 3 summarizes the overall goodness-of-fit statistics.
    Most interpreters of the root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA) test label
the fit close if the lower bound of the 90% CI is below 0.05 and label the fit poor if the
upper bound is above 0.10. CFI and TLI are two indices such that a value close to 1 indicates a good fit. CFI stands for comparative fit index. TLI stands for the Tucker–Lewis
index and is also known as the non-normed fit index. A perfect fit corresponds to a standardized root mean squared residual (SRMR) of 0. A good fit is a small value, considered
by some to be limited to 0.08. Though CFI is 0.894 for adults’ perception towards bus
when children go to school by electric bike slightly below 0.9, SRMR is below 0.05 and
in particular the full 90% confidence interval 0.027–0.030 falls below 0.05, so the overall
data fit is considered acceptable; that is, the model cannot reject the hypothesis of the
relationships among the latent factors and between them and the demographic variables
specified in Figure 2.
Results
Based on the results from the six MIMIC models, we can examine the relationships
between the demographic characteristic variables and the latent variables in TPB and
within them. Table 4 presents the estimation results. Here we can see that the psychological factors of household adults on different commuting modes, such as Intention, PBC,
and Habit, have various impacts on children’s school travel mode choice behavior. (We
will discuss the influence of adults’ latent variables towards commuting modes on
school travel modes in the next section.)
    Table 4 illustrates that children’s gender has a significant impact on children’s going to
school by electric bike and active mode. In the MIMIC model for children using electric
bikes, boys have a significantly negative influence on school travel. That is, girls are more
likely to be escorted to school by adults who have a significant habit of using electric bikes.
Table 4 also shows that boys are more likely to walk or cycle to school for male children
have a positive significant influence on active school mode, which had also been reported
by a previous study (McMillan et al. 2006). Compared to Deka’s finding that male children
are less likely to be driven to school than female children (Deka 2013), our study indicates
that children’s gender has no significant association with being driven to school.
    Most of the age category’s variables are significantly associated with school travel mode.
For being driven to school, children aged between 6 and 10 have a positive significant
influence and those aged more than 13 have a negative impact, which means that
younger children are more likely to be driven to school than older children. Children
aged 13–14 and 15–18 are less likely to go to school by electric bike. Overall, probably
due to safety concerns, younger children are more likely to be escorted to school by car
and electric bike and less likely to walk or cycle to school than older children, as previous
research has shown.
    The distance between a child’s home and their school is concerned with whether the
school travel mode is motorized or not. For the MIMIC model of school travel by car
and bus, the distance from home to school has a significant positive influence on
school travel mode choice, and for the active school mode, distance has a negative
impact. Because the electric bike has a flexible travel distance, the distance from home
to school is not associated with the mode using electric bike.
    The trip numbers of children in the day when the survey was carried out has only a
negative significant relationship with school travel mode by electric bike. That is, children
who have more social activities are less likely to travel to school by electric bike, which is
often used to escort children by adults.
    The dummy variable children indicates that more than one child is in a household. This
may lead to the likelihood that the school trip made by a child with siblings is an independent travel without an adult companion. Therefore, a child with siblings has a significant
negative impact on being driven to school and positive influence on active school mode.
Evidence from Table 4 is found that having other school-aged children in a household
increases the propensity for walking or cycling and decreases the likelihood of being
driven to school. This is in line with the evidence from previous studies (Deka 2013;
Susilo and Liu 2015).
Interactions of household adults’ latent variables towards school travel
mode
The significant interrelationships among the adults’ latent factors are summarized in
Figures 4–6, which show the standardized coefficients (with z-statistics in parentheses)
between latent factors in the path analysis diagram. (Note that * indicates p < .05 and **
indicates p < .01.]
   We can see from the three figures that the MIMIC models with the ETPB account for
77–89% of the variance of intention to use the three travel modes, which is consistent with
Bamberg et al.’s previous findings (Bamberg, Ajzen, and Schmidt 2003). In their research,
the models with the introduction of habit accounted for 77% and 80% of the variance in
intention to choose the bus and car. Although there are distinctions between the two
pieces of research, such as in travel modes and latent factors, the amount of the expanded
variance in the intention to choose between modes to some extent implies that the ETPB
can be fitted with the commute mode choice in the city of Shaoxing.
   In the three MIMIC models, SNs and DNs have a significant impact on attitude at the
individual 0.1% level, which indicates that the commuter’s fondness for a particular
commute mode is affected by social expectation. Except for the model of car, PBC has
a significant positive effect on attitude toward using electric bike and bus, that is, the commuter’s self-confidence plays an important role in taking the bus or driving an electric
bike. In the three MIMIC models, SNs and DNs have a significant positive influence on
adults’ intentions toward commuting modes directly and on children’s school travel
behavior indirectly, as shown in Table 5.
    Habit has a significant positive effect on all the other latent variables of TPB in the
MIMIC model for bus, which indicates that bus is the residents’ traditional commuter
mode and the other predictors of TPB – including attitude, SN, DN, PBC, and intention
– may be driven by habit of taking the bus. In the MIMIC model for electric bike, habit has
a significant positive impact on PBC that refers to people’s perception of the ease or difficulty of performing the behavior. Therefore, those who are accustomed to drive an electric
bike may believe that this is a kind of convenient transport vehicle that is easy to use. It is
interesting that habit has a significant negative effect on PBC in the model for car. The
phenomenon that drivers in the city always encounter traffic congestion may explain
the relationship between habit and PBC.
    PBC is significantly associated with children’s school travel behavior in all three
MIMIC models, but the latent variable that refers to PBC in TPB has a negative effect
on children’s school travel with car and electric bike and a positive effect on bus. This
may result from household adults’ perception of feeling relaxed when escorting their children to school by bus compared to driving a car or electric bike by themselves and always
having to pay attention to the traffic conditions along the way. Habit has almost the same
positive significant impact on children being driven or using electric bike to school. That
implies that car and electric bike, as the most common motorized travel modes used by
residents in China, have also become the common escorting vehicles for taking children
to school. Intention using electric bike refers to the proximal determinant of adults’ commuting travel behavior, which is the only latent variable that has a significant positive
influence on children’s school travel behavior. The relationship shows that electric bike
plays an important role in both adults’ commuting travel behavior and children’s
school travel in this city in China.
Indirect effect of adults’ demographics on children’s school travel
behavior
The coefficients of the indirect effect of adults’ demographics on children’s school travel
behavior are show in Table 6.
    Since a number studies have reported that women often show greater concerns about
traffic and street safety for themselves, Hsu and Saphores (2014) hypothesized and
demonstrated that mothers usually have greater concerns about letting their children
walk or cycle to school, which in turn affects their children’s school travel mode. Furthermore, they concluded that the effect of mothers’ car use on children’s travel mode shares is
more apparent than a father’s effect (Susilo and Liu 2015). But on the contrary with those
previous studies, our finding is that male adults are positively and significantly related to
children’s school travel mode on car indirectly and have negative impacts on children
being driven to school by electric bike and active modes indirectly, which indicates that
male adults are more likely to drive their children to school and less likely to escort children to school by electric bike or active modes. This phenomenon, which is clearly opposite to that of developed countries’ experiences, may result from the large share of electric
bikes in China. In the data-set of this study, almost 37% of respondents choose the electric
bike as their commuting mode. And from Figure 5, we also find that the habit for electric
bike use plays an important role in adults’ perception about commuting modes and children’s school travel modes. Table 6 shows that adults with a high monthly salary have a
significant positive correlation with driving to school and negative impacts on going to
school by electric bike and active modes. Because higher income households have more
travel resources and are more likely to live further from work, increasing location constraints promote more private car escort trips – which is in line with the findings of He
and Giuliano (2015). The number of electric bikes is positively related to children’s
school travel with electric bike is in line with our expectation. It is interesting that the
number of adults’ trips has a positive significant relationship with children driven to
school by electric bike, which indicates that those household adults with more activities
are more likely to use an electric bike to escort their children. In addition, both adults’ education level and age have significant impacts on children being driven to school.
Conclusion
This paper has sought to gain a deeper understanding of children’s school travel behavior.
It has integrated psychological factors associated with commuting modes and their impact
on school travel mode choice behavior with the development and application of an ETPB
together with models of the effects of demographic characteristics of participants on these
psychological factors. School travel mode choice and commute mode intention of three
travel modes in Shaoxing have been examined and can be explained by the predictors
of TPB. Moreover, DNs and habits may significantly increase explained variance in inten-
tion. In particular, the introduction of habit in our analyses resulted in the biggest incremental increase in explained variance in intention. The paper also constructed MIMIC
models to research the relationship between demographic characteristics and the latent
factors of the extended TPB. The results showed that the socioeconomic status of household adults had different significant impacts on the latent factors directly and school travel
behavior indirectly. We found that not all the psychological latent variables had significant
effects on school mode choice behavior, but habit played an essential role in the behavior
of choosing car and electric bike as school travel modes.
    In order to provide guidance on school travel mode choice, we need to research the
factors and processes that form the habit for car and electric bike use, and devise traffic
demand strategy accordingly, which may be our future work to study the school travel
behavior from the aspect of psychological factors. In addition, the analyses among the
latent factors in the extended TPB verify that the theory’s suitability in the context of
school travel mode choice increases our understanding of the role of DNs and habit
in TPB. Based on this understanding and the different demographic statistical characteristics, transportation planners could design a more socially desirable and sustainable set
of transportation policies and effective measures for intervention in school travel
behavior.

