Can bicycle training for children increase active travel?

abstract
Evidence in support of cycle training is limited, and its potential to improve safety and make a tangible difference to
cycling levels is unclear. Nevertheless, Bikeability, the UK government’s cycle training programme introduced in 2006,
is widespread in schools and is actively supported by many parents/carers. This paper draws together a number of
evidence sources in an attempt to understand the role of cycle training as one among several measures for increasing
active travel. It reviews existing research regarding the role of and outcomes from cycle training for children before
offering an overview of the current distribution of cycle training in English schools. Next it draws on two new data
sources – the 2014 CensusAtSchool and the 2014 Bikeability School Travel Survey – to explore outcomes, experiences
and perceptions of cycling and cycle training from a child’s perspective. From this it draws conclusions regarding the role
of cycle training in schools and elaborates on what this means for policy makers and practitioners.

1.     Introduction             
                                                      
The advantages of active travel for children and adults are well                         
documented, with measureable health and wellbeing bene<U+FB01>ts for                            
individuals (Gordon-Larsen et al., 2009; Hamer and Chida, 2008;                          
Humphreys et al., 2013; Martin et al., 2014; Oja et al., 2011;                           
Suminski et al., 2014), wider society (De Hartog et al., 2010; Rabl
and De Nazelle, 2012; Woodcock et al., 2009) and the public sector                       
(De Nazelle et al., 2011; Jarrett et al., 2012). As such, measures to                    
promote active travel have been widely encouraged. However,                              
evidence about the effectiveness of public policy interventions to                       
promote active travel is variable, partly because these interventions                    
often form part of wider packages of measures (Pucher et al., 2010).                     
												
Since Tudor-Locke et al. (2001) highlighted active travel to and                         
from school as a potentially overlooked source of physical activity,                     
there has been a signi<U+FB01>cant amount of research devoted to exploring                      
this <U+FB01>eld. Indeed, in 2003 the UK government recognised the
opportunity that the school run offered for pupils to engage in                          
physical activity within their policy guidance documentation                             
(Department for Education and Skills, 2003a, 2003b). Despite this,                       
the number of children cycling to school in England has remained                         
generally unchanged since the 1990s (DfT, 2014). In general, it is                       
agreed that children who travel actively to school are more                              
physically active overall than those who do not (Cooper et al., 2005;                    
Lubans et al., 2011; Roth et al., 2012; Van Sluijs et al., 2009).                        
However, these <U+FB01>ndings are not universal and vary by area type,                          

gender and other factors. Furthermore, while cycling is included
in many studies, the number of cyclists in the sample is often
very low (Cooper et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2010) meaning that less
is known about the role of cycling than walking in terms of active
travel.
Some studies have addressed cycling speci<U+FB01>cally, and <U+FB01>nd that
children who cycle to school are less likely to be obese (Bere et al.,
2011) and more likely to have a higher level of cardiovascular
<U+FB01>tness (Cooper et al., 2008) than those who do not.
Notwithstanding the general paucity of evidence about the role of
cycling in children’s active travel, Yang et al. (2010) posit that
school-based interventions to promote cycling should be further
explored and evaluated because they (especially those with parental
and community involvement) have proved to be particularly
effective at increasing physical activity (Van Sluijs et al., 2007).
The reasons why children do not cycle more are wide-ranging, and
include individual, environmental and social factors (Salmon et al.,
2007). This is reinforced by Panter et al. (2010) who suggest that
attitudinal and social support factors are associated with active
travel behaviour on the journey to school. A recent systematic
review (Lorenc et al., 2008) identi<U+FB01>ed <U+FB01>ve themes: a culture of car
use, fear and dislike of local environments, children as responsible
transport users, parental responsibility and behaviour and
contextual factors. One issue that spans several of these themes is

child safety. In fact, in the UK, parents of children aged 7–10 years
are now more worried about ‘traf<U+FB01>c danger’ than ‘stranger danger’
on the journey to school (Sustrans, 2014). However, while safety
may be one of the key concerns, evidence shows that the bene<U+FB01>ts of
cycling outweigh the risks of injury (De Hartog et al., 2010). This
suggests that interventions focusing on safe active travel may have a
positive impact on travel behaviour through minimising concerns
about risks (real or perceived) associated with safety.

There are particular opportunities for encouraging more cycling in
urban areas where routine trips are likely to be shorter, and it is
possible for individuals to switch to active modes (Pooley et al.,
2011). For children, the average distance travelled to school by
11–16-year-olds living in urban conurbations and urban city and
town areas is 2·9–3·1 miles (4·7–5·0 km). Travel-to-school
distances in the same areas for 5–10-year-olds are even lower
(1·5–1·6 miles (2·4–2·6 km)). Nevertheless, while walking is the
predominant mode of transport for 11–16-year-olds living under
2 miles (3·2 km) from school, car and bus dominate for those living
between 2 and 5 miles (3·2–8·0 km) from school, with the
percentage of children cycling reaching only 1% (DfT, 2013).

With rising levels of overweight and obese children and adults, and
signi<U+FB01>cant potential for increasing cycling to school and other
places nearby in urban areas, efforts to overcome barriers that are
putting people off cycling have never been more important. This
paper explores the contribution of one particular intervention –
cycle training – in minimising these barriers and changing attitudes
and behaviours.

2.     Effectiveness of cycle training in general

The majority of evaluations of cycle training consider knowledge
transfer and safety outcomes. On the whole, the results suggest child
cycle training is a positive intervention, as the following authors
show. Simpson and Mineiro (1992) interviewed hospital patients
involved in cycling collisions and concluded that in the 8–12 years
age group, two-thirds of accidents were due to cyclist error.
They found that children without formal cycle training were twice
as likely to have caused the collision than those with training.
In addition, Savill et al. (1996) assessed whether ‘cycle training
schemes lead to improved, safer cycling skills and knowledge’ for
children aged around 12 years, 2 years after they had completed one
of several different training courses. Trained children (especially
those whose training involved an on-road element over several
weeks) performed signi<U+FB01>cantly better than untrained children in the
practical and knowledge tests.

Others have also raised concerns regarding the ef<U+FB01>cacy of child
cycle training before the introduction of Bikeability in 2006. One
study even suggested a potential negative effect for some children,
possibly due to increased inadvertent risk-taking and reduced
supervision (Carlin et al., 1998). When investigating the links
between cycle training, accidents, attitudes and behaviours, Colwell
and Culverwell (2002) did not <U+FB01>nd any relationship between
cycle training and reduced accident levels or safer attitudes and

behaviours (although the study was undertaken some 4 years after
training and therefore any in<U+FB02>uence of the training may have been
lost). This <U+FB01>nding is supported by Macarthur et al. (1998), who
found in a randomised controlled trial that a playground-based
cycle training course was not effective in improving knowledge,
behaviour or attitudes.

The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (Rospa, 2001)
reviewed 14 evaluations of the effectiveness of cycling training
delivered between 1976 and 1998 and found mixed results in
terms of effectiveness. Overall, the review posited that practical,
on-road training is more effective than theoretical, off-road
training. A second systematic review by Richmond et al. (2014) of
25 evaluations of diverse cycle training programmes over a 30-year
period found a paucity of high-quality evaluations. They suggest
that the content of cycle training programmes has changed little
in 30 years. Furthermore, they identi<U+FB01>ed that although some
observational evaluations found statistically signi<U+FB01>cant
improvements in cycling behaviour (especially for on-road
training) and knowledge, evidence in support of the role of cycle
training programmes in reducing injury to cyclists remains
inconclusive.

Latterly there has been a resurgence of interest in evaluating cycle
training programmes for children. Lachapelle et al. (2013) found
that cycle training programmes do lead to improvement in
children’s knowledge of safe cycling, at least in the short term.
This is echoed by Hooshmand et al. (2014), who found increased
knowledge of safety after training compared to before training. An
investigation into an off-road cycle training course for young
children also found an increase in safe cycling skills among the
target group (Ducheyne et al., 2013).

While it is possible to identify a range of studies looking at the
safety and knowledge elements of cycle training (albeit of mixed
quality), surprisingly few studies have explored the impact of cycle
training on the frequency of cycling. Little is known about the
impact of cycle training on active travel, although when it has
been investigated the results are generally positive. Rush (2014)
looked at cycle to school trends in <U+FB01>ve Safe Routes to School
areas in the USA (which included cycle training as a major
component) and found increases in the level of cycling to school
in four of these. Furthermore, studies of adult trainees have
identi<U+FB01>ed an increase in cycling frequency and in con<U+FB01>dence after
training, compared to before (Johnson and Margolis, 2013; Rissel
and Watkins, 2014; Telfer et al., 2006). Two of these looked at
health impacts in more detail: Rissel and Watkins (2014) found a
small but statistically signi<U+FB01>cant reduction in weight and body mass
index, while Johnson and Margolis (2013) found an increase in
overall physical activity following the cycle training, compared to
before.

3.     Effectiveness of Bikeability in particular

In England, most cycle training delivered in schools is based on
the National Standard for Cycle Training, branded as ‘Bikeability’.

It has three levels: level 1 training focuses on cycling with control
in traf<U+FB01>c-free environments and preparing for cycling on the
road; level 2 training takes place on single-lane roads and
simple junctions; and level 3 training takes place on multilane
roads and complex junctions. Bikeability-trained children learn
to cycle on the road with traf<U+FB01>c in environments where road
design may help or hinder their journey. The vast majority of
training combines levels 1 and 2 and is delivered to children
aged 9–12 years of age (primary school years 5 and 6). Training
is delivered by national standard instructors working within
quality-assured Bikeability schemes managed by local authorities
or school games organiser host schools (Bikeability, 2014; DfT,
2012)

Arguably, Bikeability has the potential to address attitudinal
barriers directly by providing children (and adults) with skills and
con<U+FB01>dence for cycling on today’s roads, thereby encouraging more
people to cycle more safely, more often. The extent to which this is
the case is unclear because evaluation of the effectiveness of
Bikeability thus far is limited. Much of the grey literature, which
has often drawn on both adult and child participants (by surveying
parents or guardians), suggests that some people cycle more often
after training than before (CTUK, 2013; Mott MacDonald, 2010;
Steer Davies Gleave, 2008). However, such studies tend to have
weak designs, lacking comparison groups and relying on post-training 
data collection rather than pre-/post-training data collectio
and analysis.

Nevertheless, a comparison of Bikeability and school travel
administrative data showed an increase in cycling to secondary
schools in one local authority area where all feeder primary schools
delivered Bikeability, against an overall decline in cycling to
other secondary schools with less exposure to Bikeability. The
study also found larger increases in cycling to school in local
authorities with more funded training places and a longer
history of Bikeability delivery (Steer Davies Gleave, 2012). In
addition, children who had received level 2 Bikeability training
were found to score signi<U+FB01>cantly higher in a computer-based
hazard perception and appropriate response quiz than those
who had not (Hodgson and Worth, 2015). Finally, 95% of parents
think that formal cycle training for children is important, and both
parents and children who had undertaken Bikeability training
viewed it positively. Parents and children both reported children
cycling more after Bikeability training than before, and the
children also felt more con<U+FB01>dent riding their bikes (Ipsos MORI,
2011).

4.     Data sources

The previous section shows how little is known about the
effectiveness of Bikeability training at encouraging more cycling
among children. In order to explore this issue further, the remainder
of this paper discusses new data sources relating to the delivery of
Bikeability in England, including Bikeability administrative data
and two recent surveys comparing cycling outcomes for trained and
untrained children.

4.1 Bikeability administrative data

Data relating to the availability and delivery of Bikeability
in England (excluding London, which is not included in the
mapping as funding is provided to London schools by a different
mechanism) were taken from administrative data for the academic
year 2013/2014 provided by the Bikeability support team at
Steer Davies Gleave who administer the allocation of Department
for Transport (DfT) Bikeability funding each year, and the DfT
(2015a, 2015b). The data set was mapped (Elliot et al., 2000) to
show the distribution of cycle training as a relative rate across
England using a boundary data map (UK Data Service, 2014) and
best-<U+FB01>t output area lookup <U+FB01>les (Of<U+FB01>ce for National Statistics,
2011).

4.2 CensusAtSchool

CensusAtSchool (which is distinct from the school census
undertaken annually by the Department for Education) is an
international children’s census set up with the aim of ‘collecting
and disseminating real data for use by teachers and pupils in data-handling, 
ICT and across the curriculum for teaching and learning’
(CensusAtSchool, 2014). It was established in 2000 in conjunction
with the Of<U+FB01>ce for National Statistics and linked to the 2001
Census. It has subsequently developed into an ongoing project run
by the International Centre for Statistical Education at Plymouth
University.

Within the 2013/2014 version of the survey, respondents were
asked a number of questions about cycle training. These included
whether the children had participated in cycle training including
Bikeability, how frequently they cycle in general, and how
frequently they cycle to school. CensusAtSchool relied on an
opportunistic sample without random sampling; nevertheless, its
focus on numeracy and IT education is likely to reduce bias from
overrepresentation of schools that are supportive of cycling
(although of course opportunistic sampling may introduce bias in
other ways, such as within sociodemographics or other interrelated
factors). A total of 1745 of the responses collected by 18 June 2014
pertain to year 7 to 9 pupils. The data discussed in this paper were
analysed using log-linear modelling (Dobson, 2001) to identify
whether there is a relationship between cycle training and cycling
frequency among this subgroup.

4.3 Bikeability School Travel Survey (2014)

The Bikeability School Travel Survey (2014) was designed to
support investigations of the effects of Bikeability cycle training. It
was piloted in a small number of schools in May and June 2014 with
a view to launching a larger panel survey. In total, 1345 year 5 and 6
pupils from 25 primary schools in Cambridgeshire and six other
English local authority areas completed the survey. More than half
(718) of the respondent pupils (53% of the pupil sample) were from
15 Cambridgeshire schools. The remaining 627 pupils came from
ten schools in the following local authority areas: the London
borough of Ealing, the city of Peterborough, the county of
Hertfordshire, the ten unitary authorities in Greater Manchester,
Liverpool City Council and Warrington Unitary Authority. The

sample was evenly distributed between boys (51%) and girls (49%)
and across years 5 (44%) and 6 (56%).

Two approaches were used in the analysis. First, simple frequency
distribution analysis was used to help interpret the results, before
proportional odds logistic regression (Venables and Ripley, 2002)
was used to provide more detailed understanding of the relationship
between Bikeability training and overall cycling frequency,
frequency of cycling to school, con<U+FB01>dence cycling on the road and
enjoyment of cycling. The data were modelled for years 5 and 6
simultaneously using well-established multiple regression
techniques (Woodward, 2014). The modelling takes into account
several possible confounding factors as far as they have been
reported in the survey. In some cases, having <U+FB01>tted models to
various outcomes conditional on various explanatory variables, it
was found that the effect of a respondent reporting as year 5 was
different to year 6 and suitable interaction terms were therefore
incorporated into the model to account for this feature of the data
correctly. In these cases, for clarity and brevity, the results are
presented for year 6 pupils.

5. Results

Currently, it is possible for a child to receive cycle training in
every upper-tier local authority area outside London except the
Isles of Scilly, although training is not currently provided in every
school. There are around 15 500 infant, junior, primary and middle
schools in England (outside London) (Department for Education,
2014) and around 7500 of these offer training (based on Steer
Davies Gleave Bikeability monitoring data 2013/2014). Therefore,
it appears that children in around half of all primary schools in
England participated in cycle training in 2013/2014, but without
further analysis little can be said about their socioeconomic,
education or health characteristics. Nevertheless, a positive trend
can be identi<U+FB01>ed with the provision of an increasing number of
funded cycle training places since 2006/2007, as shown in Figure 1.

Outside London (where most Bikeability is funded by Transport
for London), around 90–95% of all Bikeability training places are
funded by the DfT. Therefore, the centrally provided <U+FB01>gures of
places funded each year give a good indication of the provision
of Bikeability training in schools. However, as shown in Figure 2,
the likelihood of a child receiving cycle training (outside London)
is not equal across England, with a child living in one of the
darkest-shaded areas being more than twice as likely as the overall
average to have access to training.

Under current funding arrangements, the distribution of funded
training places is based on the number of places local authorities
and school games organiser host schools bid to deliver each year.
This does not necessarily re<U+FB02>ect demand for training from pupils,
parents or schools. Further research is needed in order to discover
the socioeconomic, education and health characteristics of children
who participate in Bikeability training, and those who do not.

5.1 Frequency of cycling

Bikeability training is intended to encourage more children to cycle
more safely, more often, by giving them the skills and con<U+FB01>dence to
cycle on today’s roads. It is therefore important to establish whether
trained children do cycle more often than untrained children. Both
surveys compared the frequency of cycling among trained and
untrained children.

The 2014 Bikeability School Travel Survey used an aggregate
three-point scale to measure cycling frequency: ‘frequent’ (at least

once a week); ‘infrequent’ (less than once a week, more than once a
month); and ‘rare or never’ (less than once a month). The results
indicate that more than half (58%) of all children reported cycling
at least once a week. However, 9% fewer trained than untrained
pupils rarely or never cycled, 5% more trained pupils than untrained
pupils cycled frequently, and 4% more trained than untrained pupils
cycled infrequently.

A model was <U+FB01>tted to these data in order to determine the
association between Bikeability training and overall levels of
cycling, taking into account confounding factors such as gender
and usual location of cycling (e.g. on the road, on the footway,
in the park). This showed that the adjusted odds ratio (OR) for
year 6 pupils for the association between Bikeability and an
increased self-reported level of cycling was 1·01 (95% con<U+FB01>dence
interval (CI) 0·75–1·38). In other words, the relationship is not
regarded as statistically signi<U+FB01>cant, and while the results are
interesting, either the sample size is not large enough to detect an
effect or the association between training and overall cycling levels
is small.

CensusAtSchool collected data on the number of year 7, 8 and
9 pupils who had cycled for at least 30 min during the previous
week. When a log-linear model was <U+FB01>tted to these data it showed a
statistically signi<U+FB01>cant association between reporting cycle training
and reporting cycling for at least 30 min during the previous week
(OR 1·27, 95% CI 1·07–1·51). This shows that children who have
participated in cycle training were more likely to have cycled for at
least 30 min during the previous week than those who had not
participated in training.

While only one study has achieved statistical signi<U+FB01>cance, both
give consistent evidence of an association. The Bikeability
School Travel Survey, which focuses entirely on primary school
pupils, provides an indication that a relationship exists, but a
larger sample size is needed to con<U+FB01>rm this. The CensusAtSchool
survey, based predominantly on secondary school pupils, provides
statistically signi<U+FB01>cant evidence of an association between cycle
training and increased cycling frequency. However, the
directionality of this association remains unclear: are children and
young people who cycle frequently more likely to participate in
training, or are trained children and young people more likely to
cycle frequently? Further research is required to answer this
question.

5.2 Destinations

Both surveys included questions about cycling to school frequency
for trained and untrained children. CensusAtSchool data for
children reporting that they had cycled to school at least once
during the previous week were compared to those who had not
reported cycling to school. In this case the statistically signi<U+FB01>cant
result provided by the log-linear modelling indicates that
children who have participated in cycle training are more likely to
cycle to school than those who had not (OR 1·599, 95% CI
1·17–2·21).

The Bikeability School Travel Survey asked a similar question
with more detail. Children were asked to specify how often they
cycled to school. This also showed that children who have
completed Bikeability are more likely to cycle to school than
those who have not (see Figure 3). This <U+FB01>nding is con<U+FB01>rmed by
the use of a proportional odds logistic regression model that was
<U+FB01>tted to the data to examine the strength of this <U+FB01>nding taking
into account a range of confounding factors. These data suggest
that children who have completed Bikeability training report a
higher level of frequency of cycling to school (OR 2·25, 95% CI
1·83–3·52) than those who have not, a statistically signi<U+FB01>cant result.

The Bikeability School Travel Survey also attempted to ascertain
how children usually travel with family and friends, and how
they usually travel to a range of other destinations nearby. Of the
1345 children, 39% stated that cycling was their usual way of travel
for at least one of the categories offered to them. This comprised
35% of the children who had not completed Bikeability compared
with 43% of those who had. While the majority of both trained
and untrained children only stated cycling as the usual mode for
one category (most commonly travel to the park), trained children
were slightly more likely to state cycling was their usual mode of
transport for three or more categories. As Figure 4 shows, children
were more likely to use cycling as their usual mode of travel for
independent trips (such as to the park and when out with friends)
than for trips accompanied by an adult (such as going shopping and
when out with family). In this case, trained children were also more
likely to state cycling was their usual travel mode than untrained
children, although whether this is because children who cycle more
do Bikeability or children who do Bikeability cycle more remains
unclear.

The Bikeability School Travel Survey also asked where children
usually cycle. The results show that trained children are more likely

than untrained children to cycle on the road, and much less likely to
cycle on the footway (see Figure 5).

5.3 Con<U+FB01>dence and enjoyment

The Bikeability School Travel Survey asked how con<U+FB01>dent children
feel cycling on the road. As Figure 6 shows, trained children
are more likely to feel very con<U+FB01>dent cycling on the road than
untrained children. A proportional odds logistic regression model
was <U+FB01>tted to these data and the statistically signi<U+FB01>cant results
suggest that girls are less con<U+FB01>dent than boys (OR 0·57, 95% CI
0·45–0·72). Furthermore, careful interpretation of appropriate main
effects and interactions suggests that year 6 pupils who have
completed Bikeability reported higher con<U+FB01>dence levels than
year 6 pupils who had not been trained in Bikeability (OR 1·81,
95% CI 1·26–2·59). While this is a technical measure of effect
size it is usually regarded in public health circles as being a
large effect. Nevertheless, although this statistically signi<U+FB01>cant
result is interesting, the issue remains that the direction of the
association cannot be determined. There is evidence that children
who have completed Bikeability say they are con<U+FB01>dent cycling on
the road, but it is not known whether children who are more
con<U+FB01>dent do Bikeability or children who do Bikeability are more
con<U+FB01>dent.

Finally, the Bikeability School Travel Survey asked whether children
enjoy cycling. Overall, 81% (n = 1224) enjoyed cycling always, or
most of the time, and Bikeability-trained children were more likely
to enjoy cycling than untrained children. Based on the proportional
odds logistic regression models <U+FB01>tted to the data, there is evidence
of a very strong association between con<U+FB01>dence and enjoyment,
with a huge OR of 14·7 (95% CI 8·54–25·5) indicating that those
who said they were con<U+FB01>dent cyclists were much more likely to
report greater enjoyment. The frequency of cycling to school also
appears to be associated with enjoyment, because children who
cycle to school report enjoying cycling more than those who do not
(OR 3·81, 95% CI 2·14–7·24). The pattern of these associations
provides reassurance that the survey forms have been <U+FB01>lled in
carefully, as for example children who reported that they enjoy
cycling more are likely to be both more con<U+FB01>dent and cycle more.

6.     Discussion

Despite the documented health bene<U+FB01>ts of cycling for an
increasingly sedentary population (De Hartog et al., 2010) and the
growth in publicly funded Bikeability training since 2006/2007
(as shown in Figure 1), there is a surprising paucity of evidence
demonstrating the contribution cycle training makes to encouraging
more people to cycle more safely, more often.

In 2013/2014, more than 50% of primary schools in England
offered Bikeability training to their pupils. However, Bikeability
delivery is unevenly distributed across English local authorities,
resulting in many children not being offered any training at all
(as shown in Figure 2). More needs to be known about the children
who participate in training, and those who do not, and there
needs to be a better understanding of how Bikeability may address
public health challenges presented by childhood physical inactivity
and obesity in the context of socioeconomic and health inequalities.
Is Bikeability being delivered to the children who stand to bene<U+FB01>t
most from increased active travel?

In terms of overall cycling frequency, the results indicate a
relationship between frequency of cycling and Bikeability training.

The CensusAtSchool results clearly show that trained children
cycle more than untrained children, while the Bikeability School
Travel Survey results also suggest that trained children cycle more
than untrained children. They are also much more likely to cycle to
school. This accords with the <U+FB01>ndings of Rush (2014), who showed
more cycling in areas where cycle training had taken place. Further
research is needed into whether, how, where and why training
might lead to more cycling among children, and what more can be
done to encourage it (for example through pilot initiatives such
as Bikeability Plus (Bikeability, 2015), which offers additional
activities to deal with speci<U+FB01>c barriers to cycling).

Results from the Bikeability School Travel Survey also indicate that
trained children are more con<U+FB01>dent cycling on the road. This is
important because giving children the skills and con<U+FB01>dence to cycle
on the road, and nurturing their innate enthusiasm for cycling, may
help tackle some of the attitudinal barriers that discourage adults
from taking up or returning to cycling (Lorenc et al., 2008; Panter
et al., 2010; Salmon et al., 2007). Con<U+FB01>dence and enjoyment are
essential if children, young people and adults are to see cycling as a
viable and preferred mode of travel for life.

While many of the results from this paper are positive in terms of
supporting the role of Bikeability in encouraging active travel,
further work is needed to interpret these initial results. One major
dif<U+FB01>culty with the cross-sectional design adopted by both surveys
discussed in this paper is that causality cannot be established.
Clearly, there appear to be differences in behaviour and con<U+FB01>dence
between children who participate in cycle training and those
who do not. What is less clear is whether those children who
participate in training are different to those who do not participate
in training prior to the training, or whether the training causes them
to behave and feel differently. Future research (perhaps in the form
of a longitudinal cohort study, and additional qualitative research
to provide an in-depth understanding of context) should take
this into account, and investigate issues of causality to engender
a better understanding of the interrelationships between cycle
training and cycling frequency, location, destinations, con<U+FB01>dence
and enjoyment.

Overall, the <U+FB01>ndings discussed in this paper suggest that cycle
training does encourage more active travel. Taken together, the
data indicate that providing Bikeability training to children could
lead to individual and societal bene<U+FB01>ts. However, these results
do not offer anything more than an initial view of the likely
effectiveness of cycle training in increasing cycling levels among
children. Further research is needed in order to understand the
longer-term and wider impacts and return on investment that
Bikeability promises.

7.     Conclusions

This paper has used new data sources to investigate the impact
of Bikeability on children’s cycling. While these results came
from relatively small data sets, they indicate that cycle training is
associated with children who cycle more, are more con<U+FB01>dent and,
importantly, enjoy cycling. More comprehensive evaluations are
needed in order to attribute these observed differences in cycling
behaviours and attitudes to training rather than to confounding
factors. Evaluations establishing causal relationships should
also consider the effectiveness of different delivery models (such
as on-road, off-road, online) in addressing the needs of children
who may bene<U+FB01>t most from becoming more physically active.
Notwithstanding this, the paper has shown that cycle training for
children has the potential to play an important role in encouraging
active travel among the children and young people of today, and
potentially the adults of tomorrow.

7.1 Practical relevance and potential applications

This paper has highlighted the role of Bikeability cycle training
in increasing the level of cycling among children. It is important
for engineers to be aware of measures such as cycle training because
they can play a valuable role alongside infrastructure measures
such as cycle lanes, cycle parking, junction design and road design
in maximising the potential for behaviour change and active
travel. Furthermore, it is necessary to recognise that children and
adults who participate in Bikeability cycle training are trained to
the national standard for cycle training governed by the DfT that
teaches them how to cycle safely on the road with traf<U+FB01>c. Therefore,
it is important that the highway network supports the behaviours
that they are taught and enables them to cycle safely.