Self-proxy agreement and weekly school travel behaviour in a sectarian
divided society

Proxy reports from parents and self-reported data from pupils have often been used interchangeably to
identify factors in<U+FB02>uencing school travel behaviour. However, few studies have examined the validity of
proxy reports as an alternative to self-reported data. In addition, despite research that has been conducted 
in a different context, little is known to date about the impact of different factors on school travel
behaviour in a sectarian divided society. This research examines these issues using 1624 questionnaires
collected from four independent samples (e.g. primary pupils, parent of primary pupils, secondary pupils,
and parent of secondary pupils) across Northern Ireland. An independent sample t test was conducted to
identify the differences in data reporting between pupils and parents for different age groups using the
reported number of trips for different modes as dependent variables. Multivariate multiple regression
analyses were conducted to then identify the impacts of different factors (e.g. gender, rural–urban con-
text, multiple deprivations, and school management type, net residential density, land use diversity,
intersection density) on mode choice behaviour in this context. Results show that proxy report is a valid
alternative to self-reported data, but only for primary pupils. Land use diversity and rural–urban context
were found to be the most important factors in in<U+FB02>uencing mode choice behaviour.

1. Introduction                                                                                 
											
The increased rate of car trips to and from schools, at the ex-                        
pense of active commuting, has underpinned the growth of re-                                
search on active commuting since the late 1990s. This paradigm                              
shift in school transport research is due to the association with                           
multiple policy issues such as health (e.g. obesity, safety), economy                       
and environment (e.g. congestion), and personal development (e.g.                           
enhancement of spatial and social knowledge) (DiGuiseppi et al.,                            
1998; Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Fyhri et al., 2011; Hinckson                                
et al., 2011; Joshi et al., 1999; Yeung et al., 2008). As a result, efforts                 
have been made to identify factors that reinforce active commut-                            
ing to school. However, this resurgence has also led transport                              
researchers to rely more on the use of proxy reports from parents                           
for various reasons (e.g. perceived inability of pupils to provide                          
self-report, ethical consideration). Despite the reliance on proxy re-                      
ports, few studies to date have examined the validity of proxy re-                          
ports used in the identi<U+FB01>cation of school travel behaviour (Evenson                         
et al., 2008; McDonald et al., 2011; McMinn et al., 2011; Mendoza                           
et al., 2010; Rowe et al., 2010).                                                           
												
Proxy reports have been gathered using different types of
survey instruments including questionnaires (Fyhri and Hjorthol,
2009; Joshi et al., 1999; Schlossberg et al., 2006; Yeung et al.,
2008), travel diary surveys (Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Mitra et al.,
2010), interviews (Faulkner et al., 2010), and focus groups (Christie
et al., 2011; Lang et al., 2011). Although proxy reports have been
used to identify school travel behaviour for both primary (Joshi
et al., 1999; Yeung et al., 2008), and secondary pupils (Fyhri and
Hjorthol, 2009; Schlossberg et al., 2006); most of the studies that
aimed at validating the use of proxy reports in school transport
have focused on primary school children only. Evidence in other
research <U+FB01>elds has shown that the validity level is much lower
for secondary age children (Harakeh et al., 2006). Moreover, validation 
studies to date are mostly found in the USA (Evenson et al.,
2008; McDonald et al., 2011; Mendoza et al., 2010), with a few
exceptions in Europe (McMinn et al., 2011) and in Australia (Kite
and Wen, 2010). This, therefore, limits the external validity and
generalisation of the results globally given the contextual dependency 
of the validity of proxy reports (Robitail et al., 2007). In addition, 
the results reported in different validation studies are not
conclusive, and sometimes con<U+FB02>ict. For example, some studies
identi<U+FB01>ed a high level of validity of proxy reports (McDonald
et al., 2011; Mendoza et al., 2010); whereas others found a low level 
of validity (Evenson et al., 2008; Rowe et al., 2010). Again,
almost all of these studies used data collected from parent–child												
										             
dyads for the assessment of validity. Although the dyadic approach
has a long tradition and merits in validation, it is also subject to a
number of weaknesses (e.g. interdependency in reported data)
(Kenny, 1996). As a result, the need for the con<U+FB01>rmation of valida-
tion results based on data from independent sample has been high-
lighted in the literature (Smith et al., 2005, 2007).
Based on proxy reports or self-reports (or a combination of
both), numerous studies have identi<U+FB01>ed factors affecting travel
mode choice behaviour to schools (Davison et al., 2008; Sirard
and Slater, 2008). These factors can be grouped into: (a) individ-
ual/household characteristics (e.g. age, sex, car ownership); (b)
school characteristics such as the availability of parking spaces,
school participation in a speci<U+FB01>c programme (e.g. school travel
plan – STP, safe routes to school – SRTS, walking school bus –
WSB, walk-to-school); (c) neighbourhood characteristics (e.g. mul-
tiple deprivation, urban form); and (d) temporal characteristics
(e.g. morning, afternoon). Despite the identi<U+FB01>cation of a multiplic-
ity of factors that have in<U+FB02>uenced mode choice behaviour for
school children, very little or no research has investigated the rel-
evance of these factors on school travel behaviour in a sectarian
society. However, sectarian division has been identi<U+FB01>ed to have a
strong role in in<U+FB02>uencing adult travel behaviour (Community
Relations Council for Northern Ireland, 2000; Goldhaber and
Schnell, 2007).

Based on the above discussion, the objective of this research is
twofold: <U+FB01>rst, to test the validity of parental proxy reports for dif-
ferent age groups using data from independent samples in a sectar-
ian society; and second, to identify travel mode choice behaviour
patterns of pupils at different ages in the same context using
Northern Ireland (NI) as a case study. A detail review of literature
is conducted in Section 2 focusing on both the psychometric prop-
erties (e.g. validity) of survey instruments and the determinants of
school travel behaviour. Section 3 justi<U+FB01>es the rationale for choos-
ing NI as a case study. Section 4 discusses the data and methods
employed in this research to reach the above objectives. Results
of this research and their interpretation are discussed in Sections
5 and 6 concludes this research.

2. Literature review

2.1. Research on the evaluation of psychometric properties of proxy
report

Although self-report by subjects has been identi<U+FB01>ed as the most
preferred method, researchers have often relied on one person to
inform them about the characteristics and behaviours of another
person (Agnihotri et al., 2010; Wagmiller, 2009). This reliance on
proxy reports depends on many factors including: (a) the cost asso-
ciated with obtaining data from all members in a group and the
consequent reliance on the ‘primary decision maker’ e.g. National
Travel Survey in the UK; (b) level of dif<U+FB01>culty associated with col-
lecting data from those respondents who are unable to report reli-
ably (e.g. infant) or who are sometimes inaccessible; and (c) the
need to obtain con<U+FB01>dential data which respondents do not like to
share (e.g. drink-driving behaviour), etc. (Beck et al., 2012; Depart-
ment for Transport, 2006; Wagmiller, 2009). However, given that
the proxy reports are obtained from a third person, they are sus-
ceptible to bias and inaccuracies. Possible sources of bias include:
halo effects (i.e. response in<U+FB02>uenced by impression); acquiescence
bias (i.e. tendency of ‘yea-saying’ such as ‘yes’, ‘true’ or ‘often’);
framing effects (i.e. how the question is phrased); social desirabil-
ity (i.e. faking good to give socially acceptable answer); and end-
aversion (i.e. tendency to avoid the end-points of a response scale)
(Smith et al., 2005). Inaccuracies imply that errors are made be-
cause of a lack of knowledge or insuf<U+FB01>cient motivation to provide

correct answers. For instance, a good relationship enables people to
gather information about each other and for that reason report
more accurately. Similarly, people with poor cognitive functioning
have more dif<U+FB01>culty providing accurate answers than those with
good cognitive abilities (Mandemakers and Dykstra, 2008).
Although speci<U+FB01>c techniques exist to minimise a particular bias
(e.g. response scales based on speci<U+FB01>c, concrete behaviours, can
help to reduce halo effects), an assessment of the psychometric
properties of different instruments used to collect proxy data is a
common practice.
The three main psychometric properties of a survey instrument
are: reliability, validity and responsiveness (Smith et al., 2005).
Reliability is the degree to which an instrument is free from error,
produces stable, and repeatable results; and includes: internal con-
sistency, test–retest reliability, inter-rater reliability, and parallel
forms reliability (i.e. agreement between two or more alternative
forms of the same measure e.g. short/long). Validity is the extent
to which an instrument measures what it is intended to measure.
Researchers generally investigate three types of validity of proxy
report in different <U+FB01>elds: content (i.e. content of an instrument is
supported by the literature); criterion related (i.e. reported data
are valid against a ‘gold standard’); and construct validity. Con-
struct validity, again, can be classi<U+FB01>ed into: convergent (agreement
between similar measures), discriminate (disagreement between
dissimilar measures), and known group differences (ability to dis-
tinguish the differences that are known between groups). Respon-
siveness is the degree to which an instrument is able to detect
signi<U+FB01>cant change over time. Numerous studies have examined
the psychometric properties of proxy reports in various <U+FB01>elds e.g.
psychology (Smith et al., 2007), quality of life (Robitail et al.,
2007; Warner-Czyz et al., 2009), smoking behaviour (Harakeh
et al., 2006), physical activity (Gao et al., 2006), job satisfaction
(Flannery et al., 2012) and transport safety (McPeek et al., 2011;
Rosenbloom and Wultz, 2011). Although many of these studies
have reported an acceptable level of agreement, an opposite <U+FB01>nd-
ing is also common in the literature (Ardon et al., 2012; Gao
et al., 2006; Telford et al., 2004).
The school transport literature mainly focuses on the evaluation
of two psychometric properties of proxy reports: reliability and
validity. However, given the focus of this research, the paper re-
views only the validation of proxy reports of previous studies.
McDonald et al. (2011) have assessed the validity of a parental sur-
vey instrument as used in the SRTS programme in the USA against
in-class student tally data. This study used data from 262 parent–
student dyads. The in-class tally data was collected from two ele-
mentary schools in Charlotte. Using kappa statistics, this study
found high convergent validity (kappa > 0.75). However, this study
calls for the assessment of variability by mode as their sample was
heavily featured by motorised travellers. Mendoza et al. (2010)
have also assessed the validity of the SRTS travel survey instru-
ment using data from 81 parent–student (4th grade) dyads in
Houston. Using kappa statistics, this study found high convergent
validity (kappa = 0.87) in the reported data. Evenson et al. (2008),
on the other hand, have conducted a validity analysis of a new sur-
vey instrument with seven questions using weekly data collected
from 28 parent–student (elementary school) dyads in North Cali-
fornia. This research employed two different measures for the
assessment of validity: kappa coef<U+FB01>cient for categorical/nominal
variables; and intraclass correlations coef<U+FB01>cients (ICCs) for contin-
uous variables. Although this study found relatively lower agree-
ment on the total number of walking trips made in a week
(ICC = 0.55), other variables showed substantial agreement be-
tween parent and child reports. The authors have mentioned that
since both the student and parental measures relied on self-report,
so errors from these methods might be correlated. Forman et al.
(2008) have investigated the convergent validity a new instrument

aiming to assess the barriers (17 items) that youth encounter while
walking to speci<U+FB01>c destinations. This study collected data from 189
parent-adolescent dyads in Boston, Cincinnati and San Diego. Using
principle component analysis of the items, this study identi<U+FB01>ed 3
barrier sub-scales (e.g. environmental, psychological, and safety).
Validity assessment of the reported data has been conducted in
these sub-scales for three types of destinations (e.g. park, shop,
and school). This study reported an initial evidence of validity of
the reported barriers (ICC: 0.69–0.73 for parks, 0.46–0.68 for shops,
and 0.74–0.78 for school).
Apart from the above American studies, Kite and Wen (2010)
have investigated the convergent validity of proxy report (travel
survey) in Sydney using data from 839 parent–student (primary)
dyads. Based on the reported total number of trips in a week by dif-
ferent mode, this study calculated Spearman’s rho correlation coef-
<U+FB01>cients for each mode. They found high validity for journey to
school by car (0.765), and walk (0.765); and journey from school
by car (0.717), and walk (0.748). Weaker correlations have been re-
ported for public transport and other modes in this study. Steven-
son (1996) validated children’s (n = 100) self-reported (interviews)
exposure to traf<U+FB01>c using two techniques in Perth: ‘moving obser-
ver’ (a person observing the student while travelling); and pedes-
trian diaries. Based on the <U+FB01>ndings from both measures, this
study concluded that children’s self-reported ‘habitual exposure’
data is a valid measure of his or her actual exposure in the road
environment. Rowe et al. (2010) conducted a convergent validity
analysis of a questionnaire on walking to school in Scotland which
comprised of 14 variables. Using data from 115 parent–student
(elementary) dyads, this study found only a moderate correlations
in the reported data between the instruments (r = 0.31). In another
study in Scotland, McMinn et al. (2011) investigated the criterion
validity of a travel survey instrument. They collected data on time
spent walking to and from school using the travel diary which was
assessed against pedometer data (i.e. a gold standard) collected
from the students. This work found no signi<U+FB01>cant difference in
the reported data between instruments.
The above review con<U+FB01>rms the weakness of previous studies as
identi<U+FB01>ed in Section 1. The reviews also verify that parental proxy
report is a valid alternative to the collection of data for elementary/
primary school children globally with only a few exceptions. The
validity of self-reported data against a gold standard signi<U+FB01>es that
primary school children are able to report their travel behaviour
accurately and that this can be one of the most reliable sources
of data.

2.2. Determinants of school travel behaviour

A number of theoretical frameworks have been constructed
which explain mode choice behaviour to schools. These include
the: social–ecological model, McMillan framework, and ecological
and cognitive active commuting framework (McMillan, 2005; Sir-
ard and Slater, 2008). Amongst these, the social–ecological model
is widely used. This model explains the importance of different fac-
tors including individual/household, school, neighbourhood; tem-
poral, etc. in<U+FB02>uencing the choice of transport mode. Using the
ecological and cognitive active commuting framework, a number
of studies have reported that students from low socio-economic
backgrounds are more likely to use active modes of transport
whereas students from a white racial background are less likely
to walk and cycle (Braza et al., 2004; Harten and Olds, 2004;
McMillan, 2007; Merom et al., 2006). Higher levels of household
income and increased car ownership are consistently associated
with lower rates of walking and cycling (Pont et al., 2009). Zwerts
et al. (2010) found that boys and senior students are more likely to
make independent journeys in Flanders, Belgium. An individual’s
attitudes and perceptions have also been identi<U+FB01>ed as playing a

signi<U+FB01>cant role in choosing the school transport mode. Using qual-
itative data, Faulkner et al. (2010) identi<U+FB01>ed two stages in mode
choice decision making in Toronto. These included: (a) choice be-
tween walking and driving which depended on travel time/dis-
tance, and (b) the choice between walking alone and
accompanied which depends on the perception of safety. However,
Lee and Tudor-Locke (2005) found, these decisions are usually
made by mothers in households. Christie et al. (2011) found that
despite high levels of bicycle ownership (77%) in disadvantaged
areas of England, only 2% of students cycled to school due to per-
ceptions of safety and risk (e.g. stranger danger, road safety). How-
ever, Fyhri and Hjorthol (2009) found that the perception of risk
and safety is a signi<U+FB01>cant factor only from the perspective of par-
ents but not from the perspective of students.
Research has shown that the level of walking and cycling in-
creased signi<U+FB01>cantly in those schools that participated in speci<U+FB01>c
programmes that were designed for them, compared to those
schools that did not participate in any such programmes including:
STP (Hinckson et al., 2011); SRTS (McDonald, 2008), WSB (Lang
et al., 2011; Mendoza et al., 2009).
Numerous neighbourhood determinants of active commuting
to and from school have been investigated and have been identi-
<U+FB01>ed as having a signi<U+FB01>cant impact. Amongst these, distance from
home to school has consistently been reported as a signi<U+FB01>cant fac-
tor (DiGuiseppi et al., 1998; Mitra and Buliung, 2012; Pont et al.,
2009; Schlossberg et al., 2006; Timperio et al., 2006; Zwerts
et al., 2010). Block density (Lin and Chang, 2010; Mitra and Bul-
iung, 2012), net residential density (Dalton et al., 2011; He,
2011; Lin and Chang, 2010), and land use diversity (McMillan,
2007) have all been shown to have a positive association with ac-
tive commuting. He (2011) reported that an identical increase in
residential density increased the probability of walking or biking
by 1.09%. However, inconsistencies in research <U+FB01>ndings were also
found to exist in the literature. For example, a number of studies
found that a positive association exists between intersection den-
sity and the use of active transport mode to schools (Dalton
et al., 2011; Schlossberg et al., 2006); whereas others have reported
a negative association between these two (Lin and Chang, 2010;
Timperio et al., 2006). Active commuting is negatively associated
with cul-de-sac (dead end) density (Schlossberg et al., 2006) and
travel routes that cross busy roads (Timperio et al., 2006).
The spatial characteristics of areas (e.g. urban, suburban, and
rural) have been shown to in<U+FB02>uence active commuting. Mitra
et al. (2010) analysed the spatial concentration of active commut-
ers to school in Toronto and found that they are more concentrated
in urban and inner suburb areas than in outer suburbs. They ob-
served that urban pupils not only made more active trips to
schools, and this mode choice behaviour was also more temporally
stable in urban areas compared to inner suburb and outer suburb
areas. Seasonal variations in cycling to school have also been re-
ported. Muller et al. (2008) found that students with car availabil-
ity switch from bike to car at shorter distances in winter than those
with no car available who switch from bike to public transporta-
tion in Germany.

3. Sectarian division and it’s impact on school (transport) in
Northern Ireland (NI)

NI has a long history of sectarian violence between Protestants
(aligned to Unionist/Loyalist) and Catholics (aligned to Nationalist/
Republican) religious groups (Community Relations Council for
Northern Ireland, 2000; Hughes et al., 2007). The <U+FB01>rst recorded riot
between these groups took place in 1813 when the number of in-
migrant Catholics grew sharply due to the Industrial Revolution
(Jones, 1960). This violence intensi<U+FB01>ed gradually and reached its

peak in the late 1960s when each group began to perceive them-
selves to be vulnerable minorities and tended to move house in
search of greater security provided by residing amongst the rele-
vant ethnic group both within and between areas (Boal, 1982;
Doherty and Poole, 1997). In addition, a shift from urban to rural
areas – to live with like minded people – has been documented
by many researchers in this period (Murtagh, 1999; Stockdale,
1991).
Poole and Doherty (1996) studied residential segregation pat-
terns in 39 Northern Ireland towns using 1981 census data and
found symmetrical patterns of residential isolation: towns in east-
ern NI have higher Protestant isolation indices while those in wes-
tern NI have higher Catholic isolation indices. This work also found
that 17 towns out of the 39 were highly segregated in terms of
dominance and contained 78% of the province’s population (Poole
and Doherty, 1996). Fig. 1 illustrates that this pattern still exists in
today’s society (calculated at the output area (OA) level based on
the 2001 census data). OA is the smallest administrative unit used
to collect census data in NI (5022 in total). The Cluster and Outlier
Analysis (Anselin Local Moran’s I) tool was used in ArcGIS to gen-
erate Fig. 1 based on the literature (inverse distance conceptualisa-
tion of spatial relationship with 9 km distance band) (Anselin,
1995; Lloyd and Shuttleworth, 2012; Mitchell, 2005). Generally,
it is estimated that 35–40% of Protestants and Catholics live in
communities divided along ethno-sectarian lines and the trend

has increased in recent years (Hughes et al., 2007). However, this
does not necessarily mean that these highly segregated towns
are a homogenous entity, rather that spatial segregation of ethnic
communities can be found within a town (Doherty and Poole,
1997). It has been estimated, using data from the 1991 Census, that
45% of the population of the Belfast Urban Area live in highly seg-
regated neighbourhoods, i.e. with more than 90% of one religion or
another (Community Relations Council for Northern Ireland, 2000).
The resultant spatial segregation thus acted as an integrating
force within each group; and consequently group speci<U+FB01>c unique
activity-travel behaviour patterns have been developed due to in-
creased spatial separation of homes, workplace, shops, and schools
between the groups (Community Relations Council for Northern
Ireland, 2000). For example, Cooper et al. (2001) found that despite
availability of proximate opportunities, most households are pre-
pared to travel long distances to the workplace, shopping centres
and schools if the proximate opportunities are located within the
sphere of an opposite group. This puts further pressure on the pro-
vision of opportunities in order to meet the needs of either group. A
good example of this is the provision of education in Northern Ire-
land. Education in NI remains largely segregated; with children
either attending Catholic maintained schools or de facto Protestant
controlled schools (McGlynn, 2007; Pickett, 2008). The Rural
Community Network (2001) observed that separate schools for
Protestants and Catholics has often meant there are two schools

in areas where otherwise there might only be one. Although at-
tempts have been made to integrate education through the devel-
opment of integrated schools since 1981, only 6.6% (21,051) attend
integrated schools (Department of Education, 2011e). This phe-
nomenon has been described as voluntary integration by parental
consent (McGlynn, 2007). At present, 321,717 students are enrolled
in different schools (e.g. nursery, primary, secondary) in NI of which
120,415 (37%) are from a Protestant background and 163,693 (51%)
are from a Catholic background. However, 79% (95,528) of those
from a Protestant background are attending controlled schools
whereas 88% (144,839) of those from Catholic background are
attending maintained schools (Department of Education, 2011e).
This signi<U+FB01>es the extent of religious segregation that still exists in
the education system even after a decade long peace process.
Like education, the provision of transport services has also been
severely affected by ‘the troubles’. Evidence shows that despite
being located within areas of the same religion, groups avoided
activities in these locations if they needed to travel through areas
occupied by groups of the opposite religion (Community Relations
Council for Northern Ireland, 2000). As a result, the use of public
transport services, which usually followed routes across areas of
both religions, has dropped signi<U+FB01>cantly due to the fear of crime
on public transport. Consequently, the so called public ‘black taxi’
services have emerged which follow strictly con<U+FB01>ned corridors
connecting the segregated areas of each group (Community Rela-
tions Council for Northern Ireland, 2000; Wu and Hine, 2003). Par-
tially due to this, despite the provision of free school transport
services in NI, the number of car journeys to schools have signi<U+FB01>-
cantly increased (Hine, 2009). Fears of bullying and sectarianism
make some children feel unsafe and also create serious worries
for many parents as reported in Hine et al. (2006, p.92): ‘when they
see the uniform and know what school the children go to, some-
times things are thrown at them, stuff taken off them and abuse
shouted at them’. Burns (2006) reported that 40% of primary school
pupils and 30% of post-primary pupils had experienced bullying
and sectarianism in schools; and this trend is continuing (Depart-
ment of Education, 2011c). Department of Education (2011c) also
reported that 10.8% of bullying took place during school journeys
for primary pupils whereas the rate was reported to be 6.6% for
secondary school pupils. Burns (2006) also reported that pupils
attending controlled schools got bullied at a higher rate (83%) than
those attending in other schools. Currently, school children are eli-
gible for transport assistance in circumstances where they enrol at
a school which is beyond the qualifying walking distance from
home (two miles for primary pupils or three miles for post-primary
pupils) and has been unsuccessful in gaining a place at all suitable
schools located within these ranges (Department of Education,
2011b). Despite free transport services to schools, the growing
number of car journeys to schools is now a major policy concern
in NI.

4. Data and methods

4.1. Survey instruments

Data used in this research were originally collected as a part of
the Safer Journeys to School project commissioned by the Northern
Ireland Commissioner for Children and Young People (NICCY) and
General Consumer Council Northern Ireland (Hine et al., 2006). Dif-
ferent survey instruments were used to collect data e.g. peer to
peer workshops, focus groups with parents and pupils, electronic
survey of key stakeholders in the statutory and voluntary sectors,
and questionnaire surveys of pupils and parents. Only data ob-
tained from the questionnaire survey is reported in this paper.
The questionnaires developed consisted of three versions. For the

school pupils, two versions were distributed: one for primary
school pupils with a shorter version containing few basic ques-
tions; and a longer version for secondary school pupils. The same
basic information was contained in both versions, but it was felt
that the younger children would have dif<U+FB01>culty completing the full
questionnaire and providing all other information collected from
secondary pupils. The questionnaires were completed in class un-
der the supervision of teachers. A longer version of the question-
naire was also developed for parents and completed at their
homes. Parents were asked to provide information on their chil-
dren’s travel to and from school. They were instructed to answer
questions about only one of their children attending school. In
the shorter version of the questionnaire, pupils were asked to indi-
cate the different modes (e.g. car, bus, taxi, train, walk, and cycle)
they used in a week to go to school and their frequency of usage
(e.g. everyday, 4 days in a week, 3 days in a week, 2 days in a week,
1 day in a week, and never). They were also asked to answer the
above questions for their return journeys to home. Using the an-
swers from these questions, the total number of trips made by each
pupil in a week was calculated for each mode. In addition, the
questionnaire also contained questions related to reasons for using
their chosen modes or reasons for not using certain modes (multi-
ple response set). Although additional data were collected from
secondary pupils and from parents of both primary and secondary
pupils, these are not reported in this paper.

4.2. Data

Twenty <U+FB01>ve schools from across NI were selected based on
strati<U+FB01>ed random sampling techniques and a total of 1687 ques-
tionnaires were collected from pupils (1394) and parents (293).
Amongst these, 50 questionnaires were collected from pupils from
a special school which were excluded from further analysis. In
addition, 13 of the remaining questionnaires were found to be
incomplete and were also excluded. The remaining 1624 (293 from
parents and 1331 from pupils) questionnaires from 24 schools
were retained for further analysis (Fig. 2). Therefore, the sample
sizes in this research were found to be representative of previous
research as indicated in Section 2. Table 1 outlines the sample
characteristics of the survey which were also found to be represen-
tative of the school population in Northern Ireland. There are 1096
schools in NI (excluding special, hospital and other independent
schools) of which 223 (20%) schools are secondary and the remain-
ing are primary schools (Department of Education, 2011d). Sepa-
rate sets of schools were chosen in order to administer the
questionnaires for primary pupils (614 questionnaires), secondary
pupils (717 questionnaires), parents of primary pupils (150 ques-
tionnaires), and parents of secondary pupils (143 questionnaires).
Therefore, the data reported in these questionnaires were obtained
from independent samples.
According to the rural urban classi<U+FB01>cation of settlements in NI,
3 of the schools surveyed (12%) were located in rural areas (e.g.
Desertmartin primary school, Magherafelt; Armagh Integrated Col-
lege; Ballymacrickett primary school, Crumlin) (Fig. 2) (NISRA,
2005). These are representative considering the fact that only
one fourth of the NI pupils attend schools located in rural areas
(Table 1) (Department of Education, 2011a). These rural schools
were chosen according to their religious attachments and sampled
as: 1 maintained, 1 controlled, and 1 integrated. Fig. 2 provides the
number of questionnaires that were collected from each of these
schools. Although this shows a larger representation of data from
the eastern board (Belfast) of NI, this is justi<U+FB01>ed given that around
20% of the NI pupils attend schools located in Belfast only. The type
of management (or religious af<U+FB01>liation) associated with the sur-
veyed schools included: 9 maintained, 6 controlled, and 9 inte-
grated. The data collected from integrated schools are overly

represented in this research. Further investigation shows that this                     
is particularly true for the parental survey data from secondary                        
school. As a signi<U+FB01>cant correlation exists between school manage-                       
ment type and the religious backgrounds of pupils as indicated in                       
Section 3, no religious data was collected at the individual level                      

in this research. In addition, 98% of the school children are white
racial background in NI, and as a result, this ethnic dimension
was not considered for further investigation in this research
(Department of Education, 2011a). No household level data (such
as household income, car-ownership) were collected as part of this

research. As discussed in Section 2.2, individual/household charac-
teristics have a greater impact on school travel behaviour. A lack of
consideration of these variables is, therefore, a major limitation of
this study.

4.3. Methods

4.3.1. Derivation of neighbourhood level indicators
A number of neighbourhood level factors have consistently
been identi<U+FB01>ed (e.g. deprivation, net residential density, land use
diversity, intersection density, and cul-de-sac density) as having
signi<U+FB01>cant impacts on mode choice behaviour both in this context
(Hine et al., 2012; Kamruzzaman et al., 2011), and elsewhere as
discussed in Section 2.2. These factors were derived/obtained using
data from secondary sources. Geo-referenced school location data

was used to extract the multiple deprivation rank1 of the neigh-
bourhoods from the Northern Ireland Multiple Deprivation Measure
2010 (NISRA, 2010). Net residential density was measured using the
number of residential building footprints located within a unit area
of residential zoned lands (e.g. number/hectares) (Frank et al., 2005).
A variety of measures exist to calculate land use diversity in the lit-

erature including an entropy based measure, destination based mea-
sure, proxy based measure, perceived diversity measure, etc. (Cerin
et al., 2007; Duncan et al., 2011). All these measures have both
strengths and weaknesses and are discussed by Brown et al.
(2009). This research used the Simpson’s diversity index – an index
used in the spatial ecology literature to calculate the biodiversity of
habitats (Simpson, 1949). Unlike other measures, this method takes
into account both the richness and evenness of land uses. Richness
measures the number of different types of land uses present in an
area whereas evenness compares the similarity of different land uses
(i.e. whether the existed land uses are equally present). The follow-
ing formula was used to calculate land use diversity index in which
the higher value represents more diversity of land uses (value ranges
from 0 to 1) (Simpson, 1949):

where a is the total area of a speci<U+FB01>c land use category (e.g. residen-
tial) presents within a neighbourhood and A represents the total
area of all land use categories in the neighbourhood. The building
footprint feature class spatially represents 13 types of land uses of
buildings. These were reclassi<U+FB01>ed into six main classes (e.g. residen-
tial, commercial, industrial, social, of<U+FB01>ces, and recreational) following 
Kamruzzaman and Hine (2010) and were used to calculate the

diversity level for each school neighbourhood. Intersection density
was measured based on the number of 3 or more way intersections
located within a unit area of the neighbourhood (e.g. number/hect-
ares) whereas cul-de-sac density was calculated using the number
of dead ends located within a unit area of the neighbourhood (e.g.
number/hectares) (Fig. 3). However, a stronger correlation was
found to exist between intersection density and cul-de-sac density,
as a result, cul-de-sac density was excluded from further analysis as
they both represent street connectivity level of a neighbourhood
(Stangl and Guinn, 2011).

4.3.2. Validation of proxy reports

Unlike previous school transport research that has predomi-
nantly used data from parent–student dyads for the convergent
validity of proxy reports, this study collected data from four inde-
pendent samples (primary pupils, parents of primary pupils, sec-
ondary pupils, and parents of secondary pupils). Also, the
collected ‘number of trips’ data are continuous in nature (count
data to be more speci<U+FB01>c). As a result, independent sample t tests
were conducted in SPSS in order to investigate whether the proxy
report is a valid alternative to self-reported data for different age
groups using the reported number of trips for different modes as
dependent variables. The t test method has frequently been used
in the literature in order to evaluate the discrepancies between
self-reports and proxy reports (Robitail et al., 2007; Warner-Czyz
et al., 2009). As mentioned earlier, data collected from parents of
secondary school children were found to be overrepresented by
integrated schools. As a result, the sample data for secondary
schools were standardised by school management type in order
to make them more representative. Consequently, the validity of
proxy report was further investigated based on the standardised
sample in STATA (version 11.1) using the [pweight = weight vari-
able] option. This enables examination of whether the two results
are different.

4.3.3. Identifying determinants of school travel behaviour in NI

Determinants of mode choice behaviour were identi<U+FB01>ed only for
those modes that were found to have a larger share of the overall
commuting behaviour and included car, bus, and walk. Analysis
shows that the reported numbers of trips in these modes are signif-
icantly associated with each other for different age groups. As a re-
sult, multivariate multiple regression (simultaneous equation
model) analyses were conducted with three dependent variables.
This analysis, therefore, takes into account the correlations of the
dependent variables (Washington et al., 2010). Two multivariate
multiple regressions were estimated, one for each age group (e.g.
primary and secondary), which in turn estimated six models in to-
tal, one for each of the three modes and one for each of the age
groups. Only the statistically signi<U+FB01>cant (p < 0.1) explanatory fac-
tors for at least one outcome variable were retained in the models
upon re<U+FB01>nement of an initial starter speci<U+FB01>cation that included all
seven explanatory factors (e.g. gender, area type, management
type, multiple deprivation, net residential density, land use diver-
sity, and intersection density). Calculations were carried out using
STATA (version 11.1).

5. Results

5.1. Descriptive statistics

On average, each individual reported 9.7 trips in a week. It was
expected to have 10 trips per individual in a week considering <U+FB01>ve
schools days in a week and two trips in a day (to and from school).
However, the non-attendance rate in NI schools ranges between 5%
and 8% (Department of Education, 2011a). Therefore, the 9.7 trips

in a week might represent the authenticity of reported data. Table 2
outlines the number of trips made by pupils using different modes
in a week which are classi<U+FB01>ed according to the respondent type for
this research. Despite differences between the groups (which are
discussed in detail in the following section), on average 50% of
the trips were made by the car, followed by bus (27%) and walk
(23%). Pupils rarely used the bicycle and taxi whereas none of
the groups reported train as a mode of travel either to or from
school. Data shows that a lack of a train station close to pupils’
home location is the main reason (80%) for not using it. The main
reasons for not using taxis were cited as no taxi service near or
readily available to their place of residence (46.1%) with slightly
less (40.6%) stating that they simply did not want to use a taxi.
The main reason for not cycling was found to be longer travel time
(61.2% pupils and 71.4% of parents stated this).
The stated reasons for using the car are simply because pupils
want to use it. Given the importance of this reason, a further
re<U+FB01>nement in the instrument is necessary in order to decompose
the underlying factors associated with this. Other reasons for using
the car were found to be its speed and comfort, as shown in Table 3.
A lack of public transport was not identi<U+FB01>ed as a main cause of
using the car in this research. With regard to reasons for not using
the car, the majority stated that this was because pupils did not
want to use the car (59%) with 30% stating that there is no car in
their household (Table 3). 42% of the respondents reported that
they used car in both ways, 9% used only for travelling to schools,
and 1% used only for returning home. This, it was stated, is because
many pupils are often ‘dropped off’ by parents on their way to
work and make other arrangements for the homeward journey.
This, it seems is mainly because those parents are at work and can-
not collect the children after school (McDonald, 2008). A number of
factors were identi<U+FB01>ed that in<U+FB02>uenced to use the bus including the
proximity of services (53%) followed by parental (51%) and pupils’
(42%) willingness, and a lack of private transport in household
(30%). On the other hand, amongst those who never used the
bus, a majority of them (73%) mentioned that students do not want
to use the bus followed by lack of services (24%) within reach and
unreliability (21%) of the services. The length of journeys on foot
was cited as the main reason (97%) for not walking to and/or from
school. This <U+FB01>nding is, therefore, similar to that reported in previ-
ous research studies (DiGuiseppi et al., 1998; Schlossberg et al.,
2006; Zwerts et al., 2010). However, unlike previous research,
safety issues or stranger danger do not feature prominently as rea-
sons for preventing or prohibiting walking/cycling to and from
school in this research.

5.2. Modal split: self-reported data vs. proxy reports

Comparison of the reported number of trips by different modes,
using an independent sample t test, revealed no signi<U+FB01>cant differ-
ences between primary pupils and their parents (Table 2). This
<U+FB01>nding is similar to that reported in previous studies as discussed
in Section 2. However, unlike the studies that used data from par-
ent–student dyads, this research utilised independent samples to
validate the usability of proxy reports in a sectarian divided society. 
The <U+FB01>ndings in this research, therefore, advances the general-
isation of results in a broader sense, that is, that parental proxy
reports are a valid method for collecting school travel data for pri-
mary pupils. Speci<U+FB01>cally, the <U+FB01>ndings suggest that the parental
proxy report is valid for primary pupils irrespective of their con-
texts. From this perspective, the results found on the validity of
proxy reports for secondary school pupils can also be justi<U+FB01>ed par-
ticularly when there is little literary evidence of this in transport
research.
Table 2 indicates that a signi<U+FB01>cantly huge difference exists in
the reported data between secondary pupils and parents of secondary 
pupils when transport modes were the car and the bus.
Further analyses using the standardised sample show similar re-
sults despite the t statistics showing a slight reduction in the differ-
ences when compared to the original sample (Table 2).
Generally, parents reported a higher rate of car usage (60%) than
pupils (25%). A signi<U+FB01>cantly reduced level of bus usage was re-
ported by the parent (19%) compared to that for pupils (54%) in a
week (Table 2). Hine (2009) has shown that historically the rate
of car usage for secondary pupils in NI varies between 22% and
25% whereas the rate of bus usage varies between 55% and 58%.
Therefore, the self-reported number of trips by car and bus sit in
between these <U+FB01>gures. As a result, the validity of parental proxy re-
ports for secondary school pupils can be questioned; at least, for
these modes because there are no signi<U+FB01>cant differences in the re-
ported number of walk trips between the survey instruments.
However, considering the research <U+FB01>ndings reported in other re-
search <U+FB01>elds, these <U+FB01>ndings were expected. Shapiro (2004) has
indicated that unlike younger kids, when children grew up, parents
do not closely monitor their activities. As a result, parents report
inaccurately (Mandemakers and Dykstra, 2008). This <U+FB01>nding sug-
gests that unlike primary school pupils, care must be taken with
sample selection when an analysis focuses on senior pupils be-
cause a proxy report is no longer a valid method of data collection
for this age group particularly when it is required to analyse car or
public transport usage. Nevertheless, the reporting of an equal
number of walk trips to and from school implies that an exception
can be made in terms of sample selection when analysis focuses on
just active modes of transport e.g. walk in this case.

5.3. Multivariate regression analysis results

Distinct patterns of travel behaviour associated with primary
and secondary pupils were identi<U+FB01>ed in the above sections. Gener-
ally, primary school pupils rely more on the car and on foot for
travelling to and from school, whereas secondary pupils rely more

on the bus. This section reports the regression analysis results
showing the factors that signi<U+FB01>cantly affect mode choice behaviour
of these two groups separately. Since the proxy report for primary
school pupils were found to be representative of self-reported data,
as a result, the data reported by both primary school pupils and
parents of primary school pupils were merged together for the
regression analysis. Therefore, the sample sizes for this regression
analysis became 764 (614 pupils + 150 parents). As a signi<U+FB01>cant
difference exists in the reported data between secondary school
pupils and their parents, only the self reported data were analysed
in the regression models for secondary pupils (sample sizes 717).
The tests for the overall model indicate that the two multivariate
models (primary and secondary) are statistically signi<U+FB01>cant,
regardless of the type of multivariate criteria used (e.g. Wilks’
lambda) (Table 4). In addition, each of the three univariate models
(e.g. bus, car, and walk) was also found to be statistically signi<U+FB01>cant
for both age groups. Despite the signi<U+FB01>cance of the models caution
must be taken when interpreting the results due to their limited
explanatory powers. However, the explanatory powers of both
the car and walk models for primary school pupils, and the car
and bus models for secondary school pupils are quite favourable
in comparison with previous research (Tal and Handy, 2010).
Table 4 shows that girls, both in primary schools and in second-
ary schools, made signi<U+FB01>cantly fewer trips using the car and signif-
icantly more trips on foot than boys. The <U+FB01>ndings show that a one
unit change in this variable (i.e. from boys to girls) is expected to
reduce by 0.61–0.76 car trips in a week and increase a similar num-
ber of walk trips. This <U+FB01>nding is surprising considering the fact that
most studies have previously found an inconsistent relationship
between gender and walking to schools. Whereas some studies re-
ported that males are more likely to walk other studies found no
correlation between gender and walking (McDonald, 2012). How-
ever, this <U+FB01>nding is similar to that reported by Leslie et al. (2010)
in the Australian context. They reported with surprise that having
a higher/medium level of community disorder in<U+FB02>uenced females

to make more walk trips from schools, and therefore, this <U+FB01>nding is
more relevant to the NI context. There are virtually no differences
in the level of bus usage between male and female pupils.
A higher number of car trips, a lower number of trips on foot,
and using the bus were found to exist for primary school pupils
attending schools located in rural areas. However, the rate of car
use for secondary pupils attending rural schools was found to be
signi<U+FB01>cantly lower than their urban counterparts because of a
greater reliance on the bus. Like primary pupils, secondary pupils
attending school in rural areas also made fewer trips on foot.
Religion was found to be a signi<U+FB01>cant factor in the choice of tra-
vel mode to and from school for secondary school pupils only. Ta-
ble 4 shows that Catholics were more likely to walk and their rate
of car use and bus use did not vary signi<U+FB01>cantly from those pupils
who attended controlled schools. Pupils who attended integrated
schools were found to rely more on foot and the car at the expense
of the bus compared to their counterparts in controlled schools.
Both primary and secondary pupils living in advantaged neigh-
bourhoods made signi<U+FB01>cantly fewer trips using the bus. No differ-
ence was found to exist for primary school pupils living between
advantaged and deprived neighbourhoods in terms of making trips
using the car and walk. However, secondary school pupils who
lived in a deprived neighbourhood made fewer walking trips. This
could be due to the fact that deprived neighbourhoods have a high-
er level of crime and pupils living in these neighbourhoods avoided
walking due to reasons of personal safety. This <U+FB01>nding is similar to
that reported elsewhere in the UK and in other contexts (Christie
et al., 2011; Leslie et al., 2010).
Although net residential density was not identi<U+FB01>ed to be a sig-
ni<U+FB01>cant factor for primary school pupils, this was found to have
signi<U+FB01>cant impact for secondary school pupils. Secondary school
pupils living in higher density areas were more likely to walk. A
higher level of land use diversity decreased the level of walking
for primary pupils. In contrast, a higher diversity increased walking
for secondary pupils. Primary pupils, instead, relied more on the
cars in a highly diverse neighbourhood probably due to the fear
of stranger danger. A similar result was found for secondary pupils
despite their higher level of walking – perhaps at the expense of
bus trips. Like the <U+FB01>ndings reported elsewhere (Schlossberg et al.,
2006), intersection density positively impacted on walking for primary 
school pupils although such an association did not exist for
secondary school pupils.

6. Conclusion

This research examined two relatively unexplored themes in
the literature. By investigating convergent validity of proxy reports
from independent samples for different age groups, this research
veri<U+FB01>es the widely identi<U+FB01>ed conclusion that parental proxy re-
ports are a valid alternative to self-reported data even in a highly
segregated society. However, this validity was found to be limited
to primary school children only in this research. The analyses pre-
sented using the collected datasets show that parental proxy re-
ports for secondary school pupils are over reported for the car
and underreported for the bus. However, given that this research
utilised independent samples for the assessment of validity, as a
result, it calls for a further investigation on this assessment using
the widely used dyadic approach. Despite the invalidity of parental
proxy reports using both original and standardised samples for
secondary school, the result should be read with caution; and fur-
ther research should seek to verify this using a truly representative
sample. Nevertheless, the validity of proxy reports on children’s
mode choice to and from school for primary school pupils has a sig-
ni<U+FB01>cant implication for studies involving primary school pupils be-
cause data collection from primary school pupils can sometimes be
cumbersome for different reasons such as ethical approval. In addi-
tion, the issue of non-reporting and collection of data whilst main-
taining sample integrity can be tackled with relative ease when
data are collected from parents than pupils (Kite and Wen,
2010). The <U+FB01>ndings of this research demonstrate that proxy reports
for secondary school pupils can also be an effective method if anal-
ysis focuses on just walking. This <U+FB01>nding is also signi<U+FB01>cant consid-
ering the changing nature of school transport research in recent
years which focuses more on active transport.
Secondly, this study identi<U+FB01>es the determinants of school mode
choice behaviour for different age groups in a sectarian divided
society by applying multivariate multiple regression technique.
The models capture 3–19% of the variance in the reported number
of trips for different modes associated with different age groups.
Clearly, there are potentially many other factors that may help to
explain mode choice behaviour, including journey distance, school
characteristics, household socio-demographics, or other unknown
factors. The extent to which these known and unknown omitted
factors are correlated with included covariates may in<U+FB02>uence the
coef<U+FB01>cients reported here. Further research should seek to include
these factors and improve upon the explanatory power of the mod-
el presented here. Nevertheless, the factors that were identi<U+FB01>ed to
have signi<U+FB01>cant impacts in in<U+FB02>uencing the mode choice behaviour
are justi<U+FB01>ed based on <U+FB01>ndings from previous studies.
Sectarian division was identi<U+FB01>ed as having an insigni<U+FB01>cant impact 
on mode choice behaviour for primary school pupils. All reli-
gious groups in primary schools relied mainly on the car. This is
possibly due to the fact that primary school pupils encounter a
higher level of bullying and sectarianism during school journeys
(Department of Education, 2011c), and as a result, ‘pupils want
to use the car’ or ‘parents want them to use the car’. Sectarianism
is, therefore, a hindrance in the way of securing good health, devel-
oping social and spatial knowledge through using active transport
to school for primary school pupils in NI. A higher level of bullying
and sectarianism in controlled schools could also act as a barrier to
use active transport for secondary school pupils attending con-
trolled school as they made a signi<U+FB01>cantly fewer trips on foot
(Burns, 2006). A lower level of bus usage by secondary pupils
attending integrated schools is probably due to the fact that inte-
grated schools are sparsely located in Northern Ireland, and as a re-
sult, scheduling of bus services to these schools is dif<U+FB01>cult which
prompted pupils to rely more on the car. However, evidence from
this research shows that pupils attending an integrated school
would be more willing to walk if these schools were located within
walking distance from their home. These <U+FB01>ndings suggest that
there is room for the promotion of active travel choices amongst
Protestants’ children attending secondary schools. In addition,
the provision of more integrated schools could be a way forward
to lessen the anti-social behaviour (e.g. bullying) and consequently
to promote the use of more sustainable transport options in NI.
Despite sectarian division was found to be an important factor
in this context, <U+FB01>ndings show that land use diversity is the most
signi<U+FB01>cant factor in in<U+FB02>uencing the choice of transport mode for
both primary and secondary pupils. Rural–urban context is, yet,
another major factor for both groups. Other urban form variables
were also found to be associated with mode choice behaviour.
The <U+FB01>ndings, therefore, support the global resurgence of compact
urban development and healthy cities planning focusing on urban
design and active transport. However, the <U+FB01>ndings of this research
suggest that a careful selection of land use based interventions is
required to promote walking because not all interventions will
have identical impacts for all age groups; rather, they sometimes
impact in opposite directions (e.g. land use diversity).