Route-Based Analysis to Capture the Environmental
Influences on a Child’s Mode of Travel between
Home and School

This study examined environmental influences on a child’s mode of travel between home and school. Grade 7 and
8 students (n = 614) from twenty-one schools throughout London, Ontario, participated in a school-based travel
mode survey. Geographic information systems (GIS) were employed to examine environmental characteristics
of the child’s mode of travel between home and school measured at the scale of the likely travel route. Logistic
regression was used to assess what factors influence both the to- and from-school trip. Over 62 percent of students
living within 1.6 kilometers (1 mile) of school walked or biked to school and 72 percent walked or biked home
from school. Actively commuting to school was positively associated with shorter trips, with distance being
the most important correlate. Boys were significantly more likely to use active travel modes than girls. Higher
traffic volume along the route was negatively related to rates of active travel and children from higher income
neighborhoods were less likely to actively travel than children from lower income neighborhoods. In terms
of environmental characteristics, the presence of street trees was positively associated and higher residential
densities and mixed land uses were negatively associated with active travel to school. For the journey home,
crossing major streets and increased intersection density were negatively associated with active travel. The
findings of this research give evidence that active travel is associated with the environmental characteristics
of walking routes. This information should be considered for urban planning and school planning purposes to
improve children’s walking environments. Key Words: active travel, built environment, children’s health, GIS,
walkability.

In recent years, an enormous research effort has fo-             
cused on understanding relationships between the                
built environment and public health, especially                 
how rising rates of obesity and physical inactivity might            
be tied to sprawling, automobile-orientated forms of de-             
velopment (e.g., Ewing et al. 2003; Northridge, Sclar,               
and Biswas 2003; C. Lee and Moudon 2004; Frank, Sae-                 
lens, et al. 2007; Saelens and Handy 2008; Gilliland                 
2010). In parallel, designers and planners have been                 
working to create environments that encourage reduced                
rates of automobile use and increased rates of walk-                 
ing by creating more mixed-use, compact, and better                  
connected neighborhoods (Saelens, Sallis, and Frank                  
2003; Southworth 2005; Frank et al. 2006; C. Lee and                 
Moudon 2006).                                                        
The interest in encouraging active lifestyles includ-
ing walking and cycling as a normal part of children’s
travel routines is clear. Rising rates of childhood                  
obesity, diabetes, and asthma are well documented in
most developed countries, with Canada and the United                     
States, in particular, showing alarming rates of increase            
(Mannino et al. 1998; Ludwig and Ebbeling 2001;                      
Ogden et al. 2002; Be´langer-Ducharme and Tremblay                   
2005). As with adults, increasing rates of childhood obe-            
sity are hypothesized to be related to decreasing levels of          
physical activity and have been linked to environments               
that encourage sedentary behaviors such as automobile                
usage (Goran 1997; Weinsier et al. 1998; French, Story,              
and Jeffery 2001; Catford 2003; Epstein et al. 2008).                
This is worrisome, as regular physical activity lowers the           
risk of obesity, coronary heart disease, and a variety of            
other diseases, including hypertension, Type 2 diabetes,             
and socio-psychological problems such as depression                  
(Figueroa-Colon et al. 1997; Fagot-Campagna et al.                   
2000; Figueroa-Munoz, Chinn, and Rona 2001; Janssen                  
and LeBlanc 2010). Increasing levels of physical activ-              
ity at a young age is extremely important, as physically             
active children are more likely to remain active as adults           
(Vanreusel et al. 1997; Conroy et al. 2005; Telama et al.            
2005). The most common form of physical activity for                

people of all ages is walking (Saelens, Sallis, and Frank
2003), and for children and youth, the journey to school
represents an important opportunity to potentially
increase daily levels of physical activity by using active
travel modes, such as walking and biking, as part of
their normal routine (Tudor-Locke et al. 2002; Cooper
et al. 2003; Cooper et al. 2005; Kerr et al. 2006). This
makes increased understandings of the determinants
of children walking to school salient to public health
research and public policy decisions. With rates of
active travel to school decreasing in recent decades
(McDonald 2007; Ham, Martin, and Kohl 2008;
Buliung, Mitra, and Faulkner 2009), this is particularly
important if policy responses are to successfully reverse
current trends.
Rates of Active Travel to and from School
Studies on children’s travel to date have found a
wide range in the rates of using active travel modes
for the trip to and from school, although comparisons
are difficult because of large differences in study settings
and methodologies. Still, rates are instructive as general
context. For instance, a study of fifty-one schools in
south and central England found that 67 percent of
students walked to school, 32 percent used motorized
travel, and only 1 percent of students rode a bicycle
(Black, Collins, and Snell 2000). Total rates of active
travel in Odense, Denmark, were found to be similar,
accounting for 63 percent of school trips, but bicycling,
at 39 percent of the total, was the most utilized mode
(Cooper et al. 2005). A study of Australian children
found substantially lower rates, with only one third of
students (33 percent) in West Sydney using an active
travel mode on the journey to or from school at least
five times per week (Wen et al. 2008). Rates for active
school travel in China are quite high, as 88 percent
of children were found to actively travel to school in
Jiangsu Province and 84 percent at the nationwide level

(Tudor-Locke, Ainsworth, Adair, Du, et al. 2003; Shi
et al. 2006). Rates might not be this high for all of Asia,
as only 41 percent of Filipino youth actively commuted
to school (Tudor-Locke, Ainsworth, Adair, and Popkin
2003). Levels of active travel to school in the United
States are generally lower still. A study conducted at
thirty-four elementary schools in California found 37
percent of children walking or biking to school (Braza,
Shoemaker, and Seeley 2004). Even further down the
scale, Evenson et al. (2003) found that only 9 percent
of students walked and 4 percent biked to elementary
school in North Carolina at least one day a week, and in
South Carolina, Sirard et al. (2005) found that as few as
5 percent of elementary children used active commute
modes to school.
Factors such as how the study population is defined
in terms of age group, geographic scale, and other is-
sues need to be controlled to make these comparisons
more useful, but distance emerges as a key factor in
all studies. For example, when the data are restricted
to a population living within 1.6 kilometers of their
school, Martin, Lee, and Lowry (2007) found that 48
percent of children in a U.S. study were active trav-
elers, and Schlossberg et al. (2006) found that 32 per-
cent of students in Oregon walked to school, with rates
increasing to 52 percent on the return journey home
from school. What might be more important than the
rates themselves is the general trend that rates of ac-
tive travel are steadily declining in many developed
nations. In Canada, for example, Buliung, Mitra, and
Faulkner (2009) found a nearly 10 percent decline over
the past twenty years in the greater Toronto area, with
53 percent of children (aged eleven to thirteen) actively
commuting to school in 1986 compared to only 42 per-
cent in 2006. Likewise, Pooley, Turnbull, and Adams
(2005) have shown in the United Kingdom that the
percentage of children aged five to ten who are actively
traveling to school has decreased from 75 percent to 53
percent over the past thirty years, and for older chil-
dren, aged eleven to sixteen, rates have declined from
60 percent to 44 percent. In the United States, the
story is even more stark, with rates of children actively
traveling to school dropping from 41 percent in 1969
to a mere 13 percent in 2001 (McDonald 2007; Ham,
Martin, and Kohl 2008). Understanding the reasons for
these declines is a pressing policy concern. Declining
rates might be related to changes in the built environ-
ment; people might be living in more suburban areas far-
ther from their schools or no longer attending the local
neighborhood school. These changes can influence the
distance one must travel, which is the largest contribu-

tor in determining travel mode (Timperio et al. 2004;
Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley 2004; Merom et al. 2006;
Schlossberg et al. 2006; McDonald 2007).


Physical Activity and the Built
Environment

The built environment, including buildings, parks
and open spaces, and the transportation system (streets
and sidewalks), have been associated with promoting
and hindering energy expenditure (Humpel, Owen, and
Leslie 2002; C. Lee and Moudon 2004; Lake and
Townshend 2006). Access to facilities such as parks,
recreation centers, or health clubs can support and
encourage physical activity (Sallis et al. 1997; Gordon-
Larsen, McMurray, and Popkin 2000; Brownson et al.
2001; Huston et al. 2003; Molnar et al. 2004; Norman
et al. 2006; Motl et al. 2007), and neighborhood
walkability and street design have also been associated
with higher levels of physical activity (Frank 2000;
Handy et al. 2002; Frumkin, Frank, and Jackson 2004).
Neighborhood environmental features such as the
presence of sidewalks, the configuration of the street
system, residential densities, and the relative mix of
land uses have all been identified as influencing travel
modes among adults (Holtzclaw 1994; Handy 1996;
Cervero and Kockelman 1997; Frank, Engelke, and
Schmid 2003; Humpel et al. 2004; Owen et al. 2004;
Li et al. 2005; Frank et al. 2006).
Less is known about the influences of the built en-
vironment on travel modes among children (Ewing,
Schroeer, and Greene 2004; McMillan 2005), despite
the fact that younger populations are more “captive” to
the features in their local surroundings. Because chil-
dren have fewer transportation options, they are gen-
erally more susceptible to the opportunity structures
in their local environments (Kytta¨ 2004). Opportunity
structures are features of the environment that promote
or damage health either directly or indirectly through
the possibilities they provide for people to live healthy
lives (Gilliland and Ross 2005; Larsen and Gilliland
2008). Environmental changes might be even more im-
portant for this vulnerable population as children are
more likely to benefit from increasing neighborhood
“walkability.”
Distance between home and school has commonly
been the most important factor in determining a child’s
mode of travel: As distance increases, the probability
of active commuting decreases (Timperio et al. 2004;
Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley 2004; Merom et al. 2006;

Schlossberg et al. 2006; McDonald 2007). Other char-
acteristics of the built environment also play impor-
tant roles in determining commuting modes, however.
Commonly identified factors for children include the
“connectivity” of the pedestrian travel network, resi-
dential density, land use mix, the presence of a con-
tinuous sidewalk system, and both real and perceived
safety from traffic and crime (Boarnet, Day, et al. 2005;
Schlossberg et al. 2006; Frank, Kerr, et al. 2007; Kerr
et al. 2007; McMillan 2007; McDonald and Aalborg
2009).
The evidence in child-focused studies is much more
mixed than in adult studies. Some child-focused studies
have found that connectivity (as measured by inter-
section density) is positively associated with rates of
active transportation (Braza, Shoemaker, and Seeley
2004; Schlossberg et al. 2006; Frank, Kerr, et al. 2007;
Kerr et al. 2007), but others have found a negative rela-
tionship (Timperio et al. 2004; Ulfarsson and Shankar
2008). Associations between street connectivity and
active travel among children are unclear. More con-
nected street networks have more route options than
less connected networks but also have more streets that
children must cross as part of their route.
Higher residential densities are thought to be a
proxy variable associated with environmental charac-
teristics that discourage driving such as limited parking
availability and characteristics that support good street
environments for pedestrians. To date, evidence is con-
tradictory and no clear relationship exists with regard to
residential density and mode of travel among children.
Ewing, Schroeer, and Greene (2004), for example,
found no relationship between residential density and
rates for walking to school, but other studies have
suggested that higher densities are positively associated
with children’s active travel (Braza, Shoemaker, and
Seeley 2004; Frank, Kerr, et al. 2007; Kerr et al. 2007).
Once again, no clear connection exists between mixed
land uses, which increases the number of potential
destinations accessible by foot, and children’s travel.
At least two studies have found a positive association
between land use mix and active travel to school (Kerr
et al. 2006; McMillan 2007), whereas Ewing, Schroeer,
and Greene (2004) found no relationship.
The safety of places is key to understanding children’s
travel. Safety, both objectively measured (e.g., with per-
sonal crime or motor vehicle collision statistics) and as
perceived by children or parents, incorporates aspects
of both the social environment (as an issue of personal
security) and the physical environment (as an issue of

traffic safety; DiGuiseppi et al. 1998; Bradshaw 2001;
Collins and Kearns 2001; Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley
2004; Boarnet, Anderson, et al. 2005; McMillan 2005).
On the social side, fear of crime is pervasive and is a
common reason parents report for driving their children
to school (Joshi and MacLean, 1995; DiGuiseppi et al.
1998; McDonald and Aalborg 2009). Ahlport et al.
(2008), for example, found that parents feel uncomfort-
able letting their children walk to school because they
do not know whether or not their children have arrived
safely. On the physical environment side, perceptions
of safety from traffic along the route to school are an
important parental concern (Martin and Carlson 2005;
Schlossberg et al. 2006; McMillan 2007; Ahlport et al.
2008). Surprisingly, only a few studies have carefully
examined this relationship. Street and railway cross-
ings, for example, are a key element of pedestrian and
cycling safety, but there is no strong evidence on the
relationship of children’s travel mode to school with
these types of crossings. An Australian study reported
that many children are driven to school because of
dangerous road crossings (Wen et al. 2008), but Schloss-
berg et al. (2006) found no evidence in an American
study to suggest that they have an important influence
in travel choices.
The presence of a good network of sidewalks is re-
lated to traffic safety (Frank, Engelke, and Schmid 2003;
Frumkin, Frank, and Jackson 2004) and has been pos-
itively associated with higher rates of active travel for
the journey to school in some studies (Boarnet, Day,
et al. 2005; Fulton et al. 2005; Kerr et al. 2006). Other
potentially important elements of the pedestrian en-
vironment for children are even more understudied.
These include the presence of tree cover in school
neighborhoods, which provides shade, improves aes-
thetics, and might increase the likelihood of children
walking to school (McMillan 2003). Although under-
studied in the active school transport literature, a few
studies have examined the association between prox-
imity to greenspace in relation to levels of physical
activity or body mass index (BMI; Liu et al. 2007; Bell,
Wilson, and Liu 2008; Wolch et al. 2010). For a sam-
ple of children surveyed in Indianapolis, higher levels
of greenspace or the Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index were significantly associated with walking envi-
ronments that children perceived to be more pleasant
(Liu et al. 2007). Recent research has also found that
children who had better access to greenspace are more
physically active and have a lower BMIs (Bell, Wilson,
and Liu 2008; Wolch et al. 2010).

Sociodemographic Variables

Personal and social characteristics can also be re-
lated to travel mode, as most studies use household
income as a basic socioeconomic indicator. Lower in-
come households more commonly have higher rates of
active school travel (McMillan et al. 2006; Vovsha and
Petersen 2005; Frank, Kerr, et al. 2007; Chillon et al.
2009), suggesting that families of lower socioeconomic
status are less likely to use an automobile, perhaps be-
cause of lower ownership rates. Studies also often test
for household automobile ownership as a separate vari-
able from income but have not shown that the number
of vehicles per household clearly affects the mode used
for school trips (DiGuiseppi et al. 1998; Vovsha and Pe-
tersen 2005; Schlossberg et al. 2006). This might relate
to extremely high automobile ownership rates in North
America.
At the level of individual characteristics, gender has
been shown to be an important variable in understand-
ing children’s travel. A study by McMillan and col-
leagues (2006) found that girls were 40 percent less
likely than boys to actively commute to school. Other
studies have had similar results, with walking or biking

to school much more prevalent among males than fe-
males (Evenson et al. 2003; Fulton et al. 2005; Merom
et al. 2006; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008). Although
several studies have found associations, no consistent
finding has been determined to date with regard to gen-
der (Metcalf et al. 2004; Dollman and Lewis 2007; M.
C. Lee, Orenstein, and Richardson 2008).

GIS Methods Used in Previous Research

Most studies use spatially aggregated neighborhood
data to examine the link between environment and
mode of travel. The location of the school (destination
based) or home has commonly been used as the center
point around which the potential area or neighborhood
will be examined (Braza, Shoemaker, and Seeley 2004;
Kerr et al. 2006; Frank, Saelens, et al. 2007; McMil-
lan 2007). The boundaries around either the residence
or school are calculated within geographic information
system (GIS) software using a simple straight line buffer,
defined as the area within a set distance around either
the residence or school (Braza, Shoemaker, and See-
ley 2004; Kerr et al. 2006; Frank, Saelens, et al. 2007;
McMillan 2007; Larsen et al. 2009) or a network ser-
vice area (Kerr et al. 2006; Frank, Saelens, et al. 2007).
A network service area is computed based on a set dis-

tance someone can travel in any direction along the
actual street network, creating a nonsymmetrical, more
spatially accurate neighborhood. The latter method still
assumes that all routes are equally likely to be traveled
and environmental conditions are spatially aggregated
across the entire service area.
A few recent studies have used the shortest travel
route along the street network to measure their expo-
sure to the potential travel environment (Schlossberg
et al. 2006; Timperio et al. 2006). Scholossberg et al.
(2006) used a buffer of 200 meters on either side of
these routes to measure environmental characteristics.
Similarly, work by Timperio et al. (2006) focused on
examining attributes directly associated with the short-
est path that do not need to be buffered such as street
crossings, traveling along busy streets, route directness,
and steep inclines. This study aims to build on these ad-
vancements by using a route-based analysis and improv-
ing the modeling of the environmental characteristics
to which children are potentially exposed.

Methods

Study Sample and Active School Travel Survey

A travel mode questionnaire was completed by grade
7 and 8 students at a sample of elementary schools
within the city of London, Ontario, Canada. Prior to the
commencement of school recruitment, ethics approval
was obtained from the University of Western Ontario’s
Research Ethics Board and the ethics boards at both the
Thames Valley District School Board (TVDSB) and the
London District Catholic School Board (LDCSB). In
total, there were fifty-one elementary schools eligible
for participation, and twenty-one agreed to take part
in the study (a school response rate of 41 percent). Of
the schools participating, eleven were from the LDCSB
and ten from the TVDSB. The sampled schools were
located in neighborhoods of varying income and built
environments, allowing for assessment of the social and
physical factors children experience on their journey to
school. Figure 1 displays the distribution of the sampled
schools along with median household income by census
tract in urbanized London.
A total of 1,666 grade 7 and 8 students from both
school boards were eligible to participate; 810 ob-
tained parental consent and were in attendance on
the day of data collection (a response rate of 49 per-
cent). The questionnaire completed by students asked
the method of travel for both the to-school and from-
school trip, gender, home postal code, neighborhood

characteristics, and behavioral, dietary, and environ-
mental questions. Parental surveys were also sent
out with the children’s permission forms to obtain
individual-level social and demographic characteristics
for each household.
In an effort to control for school board busing prac-
tices, only children living within 1.6 kilometers of their
school were used in the analysis because, except in ex-
ceptional cases, they are not eligible to take school
buses.1 Previous research also suggests that living within
this distance from a school considerably increases the
likelihood of walking (Timperio et al. 2004; Schlossberg
et al. 2006; McDonald 2007; McMillan 2007), so the
decision was made to look at only the population of stu-
dents who were within a reasonable walking distance.
This created a final sample of 614 students.

GIS Analysis of the Shortest Path

This study makes methodological improvements
over previous research in how it models potential
travel environments. Following Schlossberg et al.
(2006), environmental features were modeled along
travel corridors based on the shortest route between
a participant’s home address and school. The home
location was geocoded as the geographic center of the

reported home postal codes rather than addresses to
protect the anonymity of participants in the survey
process. Postal codes, in Canada, are much smaller
than American ZIP codes and in an urbanized area
can identify the location of a residence down to the
block. The median area of a postal code in the study
area was less than 10,000 square meters (one hectare);
thus postal codes are a reasonable spatial proxy for the
home address. The school end of routes was geocoded
precisely as the front entrance of the school building.
Data on sidewalks, road networks, street trees, path-
ways, railways, traffic volumes, and land use types were
obtained from the City of London Planning Depart-
ment and validated by researchers through field surveys
and inspection of air photos. Environmental audits were
completed by the authors for eleven of the schools,
creating a high degree of confidence in the interpreta-
tion of the aerial photographs. Data on traffic volumes
and street trees are important to modeling the potential
travel environment but are included in only a few previ-
ous studies. The traffic data used in this study were com-
piled by the City of London’s Environmental and Engi-
neering Services Division and updated in 2005 through
automated traffic recorders and manual vehicle counts
at intersections. The street tree data were derived from
an inventory conducted by the City’s Forestry Group in

2002. It is based on field surveys and is updated regularly.
All data for this study were updated in autumn of 2006.
Finally, data on crime were based on reported residential
burglaries obtained from the London Police Services, for
the years 1998 through 2003. Crime data were geocoded
to the appropriate street segment, and the number of in-
cidents per segment was summed for the six years of data.
To improve the accuracy of likely pedestrian routes, the
study went beyond previous efforts that define poten-
tial travel routes using the street network only. Previous
work has calculated the shortest path between home
and school based on the road network. Most road net-
works do not include pedestrian walkways, sidewalks,
or informal pathways commonly used for the journey to
school. Here, a “circulation system” file was built using
a combination of the street network, trails, and path-
ways file. These data were manually updated to ensure
accuracy using 2007 aerial photography (15-cm resolu-
tion) and field surveys. This file allowed researchers to
determine all possible walking routes, including infor-
mal pathways such as shortcuts through parks, school-
yards, and so on, within the city. Network analysis was
employed within a GIS to calculate the shortest path
between each respondent’s home postal code and his or
her school using the circulation system file.
Each estimated route was then buffered by 50 me-
ters, creating a 100-meter-wide travel corridor, where
features of the built environment were examined (Fig-
ure 2). Within these corridors the pedestrian experience
was modeled through measurements of the traffic envi-
ronment, street and railway crossings, network connec-
tivity, sidewalk density, street tree density, percentage
of single detached dwellings (as a measure of density),
and land use mix. In terms of exposure to traffic, there
is little evidence-based guidance as to how traffic expo-
sure affects the decision to use active travel modes; for
example, whether average levels of exposure along the
route, or particular segments with high exposure, have
higher likely impacts. We used the latter assumption
and identified the street segment with the highest level
of traffic for each travel corridor. Additionally, to model
the impact of crossing major streets and railways, the
number of crossings of streets classified as arterial roads
or highways and active railway tracks between home
and school was assigned to each route.
The connectivity of the circulation system along
each route was measured as the density of three- or
four-way intersections per square kilometer within each        
route buffer. The directness of travel routes is also asso-     
ciated with network connectivity. Because the role of  

Route-Based Analysis of Influences on a Chi
route-directness on children’s travel is not clear, route-
directness was calculated separately as the distance be-
tween the child’s residence and school measured as a
straight line, divided by the shortest path distance be-
tween the residence and school along the circulation
system. Theoretically, the measure can vary between
one, with completely straight, direct travel routes, and
numbers closer to zero, with very indirect, circuitous
travel routes. The final measure of the circulation net-
work modeled was the coverage of the sidewalk system
within the corridor, calculated by dividing the total
length of sidewalks measured along the network within
the route buffer by the distance between the residence
and school. High numbers (>1) represent routes with
good, complete, or nearly complete sidewalk systems,
whereas low numbers correspond to corridors with lim-
ited sidewalk systems.
Moving to more general environmental conditions,
street tree cover was measured by summing the total
number of trees located within 5 meters of a roadway
edge, divided by the area within each route buffer. This
restricted distance was used to eliminate trees found in
backyards on the assumption that they have less impact
on pedestrians. Land use mix and the percentage of
single detached dwellings were measured for the whole
50-meter buffer area. The percentage of single detached
dwellings was measured as the percentage of total land
dedicated to single detached houses divided by the total
area within each buffer. This was used instead of typi-
cal net residential densities because data at the parcel
level could be used to create a more precise measure-
ment than using residential and dwelling data at the
aggregated census block level. Land use mix was calcu-
lated using an entropy index following previous studies
(Frank, Andresen, and Schmid 2004; Leslie et al. 2007).
The measure calculates the evenness of the distribution
of the amount of land in different categories. Here, ev-
ery parcel of land was classified according to five classes
defined by the City of London: recreational, residential,
institutional, industrial, and commercial. The total area
for each was calculated within each individual buffer
and the entropy index of distribution was calculated as
follows:

where u is the land use classification, <U+03C1> is the proportion
of land area dedicated to a particular land use, and n
is the total number of land use classifications. Scores
range from zero to one, with zero representing all land

in a corridor as in a single land use (e.g., all residential)
and one representing an even distribution of all five
land use classifications.
Variables related to the social environment included
burglary rates and neighborhood income. Crime was
measured similarly to traffic in that the street segment
with the highest number of burglaries summed over six
years of data was assigned to each route. Data for median
household income were obtained from the 2001 Cen-
sus of Canada at the census tract scale. Income data
for each buffer were weighted according to the propor-
tion of area within the corresponding census tract. For
example, if 60 percent of a corridor was in a census
tract with a median household income of $80,000 and
40 percent in a tract at $50,000, the assigned median
household income would be $68,000: ($80,000 × 0.6)
+ ($50,000 × 0.4).

Data Analysis

Univariate logistic regression was employed to
determine which variables (environmental and so-
cial) had statistically significant associations with the
journey to and from school. A correlation matrix was
used to test for cross-correlations. Although it was orig-
inally thought that certain features such as maximum
traffic, intersection density, and major street crossings
might be correlated, results found no such multi-
collinearity issues. Backward conditional logistic regres-
sion models were created for both to and from school,
with active travel as the dependent variable. The fol-
lowing variables were included in the logistic regression
model: land use mix, percentage single detached homes,
distance to school, maximum traffic in buffer, number
of rail crossings on route, density of street trees in buffer,
sidewalk coverage, route directness, median household
income, intersection density, crime along route (max),
gender, and major streets crossed.
To test the strength and reliability of the models,
both the Hosmer and Lemeshow test and Nagelkerke R-
square values are reported. The Hosmer and Lemeshow
test examines whether the model for the predicted prob-
abilities is a good match; in this test a large p-value
(>0.05) is required (Lemeshow and Hosmer 1982).
Hosmer and Lemeshow test values for both the to and
from school trip were well above the required 0.05.
The Nagelkerke R-square value attempts to explain
the proportion of variance explained by logistic regres-
sion (Nagelkerke 1991); in the model for the journey
to school, a value of 0.355 was found, which would


predict 36 percent of the cases. For the trip home from
school, the Nagelkerke R-square value was even higher,
at 0.454 or 45 percent of cases.

Results

Descriptive Statistics

Almost three quarters of the 614 students in the
sample reported living in single detached houses (71
percent), 10 percent reported living in an apartment
building, 9 percent in a row house, and 7 percent in
a semidetached dwelling. Nearly 95 percent of house-
holds had access to at least one working automobile, and
the majority (53 percent) had two vehicles. In terms
of income, response rates on parental questionnaires
were considered too low to use for individual analysis
(~60 percent). Instead, a weighted ecological variable
was constructed using data for median household in-
come using 2001 Canadian Census data at the census
tract level, based on the proportion of route in each
tract. The median household income of the respon-
dent’s home census tract was $60,179. The average age
of students in the sample was twelve years and eight
months.
The median distance between home and school for
the sample was 998 meters along the shortest path on
the circulation system including streets and off-street
pathways. Travel times were short, with over two thirds
(68 percent) of students reporting that it took them less
than ten minutes to travel to school and another 26
percent stating it took them between ten and twenty
minutes.
Nearly two out of three, or 62 percent, of students
living within 1.6 kilometers of their school, used an
active travel mode, and 72 percent used an active mode
on the journey home from school (Table 1 and Figure 1).
On the trip to school, walking dominates as the active
mode, accounting for 59 percent of all to school trips by
sampled students. Other active modes account for only
a minor share of these trips, with 2.8 percent by bicycle
or scooter and a mere 0.8 percent by skateboard or inline
skates. For students who used a motorized vehicle to get
to school in the morning, 22 percent were driven in an
automobile, whereas 15.5 percent rode the school bus,1
and only 0.5 percent used public transit. More students
walked on the journey home from school (67 percent)
than the journey to school, with the number of students
driven home from school almost 10 percent lower than
those driven to school. Survey results found that almost
60 percent of students reported that the driver of their

vehicle was going somewhere else (besides home) after
the drop off.
The sample was 53 percent female and 47 percent
male (Table 1). Walking rates for boys and girls travel-
ing to school are nearly the same, at 58.5 percent and
57.5 percent, respectively. The use of other forms of
active travel is highly gendered, however, with 5.6 per-
cent of boys bicycling and only 0.6 percent of girls doing
so. Likewise, only 0.8 percent of boys used skateboards
or rollerblades, and no girls reported using these modes.
Thus, overall, active travel rates were higher for boys
than girls, at 66 percent for boys and 58.1 percent for
girls. Correspondingly, a higher percentage of girls than
boys were driven in an automobile (25.9 percent and
17 percent, respectively).
Parents are clearly involved in these modal decisions.
Considering the entire sample, more children walked
to school, 59 percent, than reported that this was their
preferred mode of travel, only 44 percent. For other
active modes, however, many more students reported

using these modes than actually did so. For bicycling                                
and scooters, the difference is dramatic, with 22 percent                            
reporting these as a preferred mode but only 3 percent                               
actually using them to get to school. Similarly, only 1                              
percent of students used a skateboard or inline skates                               
(i.e., rollerblades), although as many as 10 percent favor                           
this method of travel. For motorized modes, including                                
being driven in a private vehicle or school bus, actual                              
rates are higher than stated preferences. Whereas 22                                 
percent of students were driven to school in a private                               
vehicle and another 16 percent in a school bus, only
16 percent of students wanted to be driven to school                                
in a vehicle and 7 percent preferred the school bus,
a combined decrease of 15 percent from actual modes                                     
of travel. In total, 76 percent of students would rather                             
travel using a physically active mode; however, nearly                               
12 percent fewer students actually do so.                                            
An examination of preferences by gender reveals that                             
when looking across active modes, boys’ and girls’ pref-                             
erences are fairly similar, with about 79 percent of boys                            
preferring to travel by an active mode and 74 percent                               
of girls reporting this preference. Important differences        

do exist, however, when looking at individual modes.
Walking was more preferred by girls, and other ac-
tive modes such as bicycles, skateboards, scooters, and
rollerblades were more preferred by boys. Still, a sub-
stantial percentage of girls reported preferring modes
that almost no girls actually use, with bicycling, pre-
ferred by 18 percent, standing out in particular. Overall,
preferences for motorized modes of transportation were
very similar for both girls and boys, with nearly one in
four preferring to be driven to school.

Modeled Analyses

Consistent with previous studies, model results for
the to-school trip show that the distance between the
residence and school is the most important predictor
in determining a child’s travel mode (Table 2). As
the distance increases, the likelihood of a child using
a form of active travel significantly decreases. Figure
3 visualizes relationships between the residence location 
and distance between home and school and, as expected, 
schools with sampled students clustered in close

proximity clearly show larger percentages of active
travel than schools with more spatially dispersed
students.
As in previous research, median household income
also decreases the odds of children walking or biking to
school. The level of vehicular traffic, measured as the
highest volume along any network link in the modeled
travel route, is a negative factor for the use of active
travel modes, with more traffic associated with a de-
crease in the probability of a child walking or biking to
school. A child’s gender is also a statistically significant
factor in modal choice, with boys 1.7 times more likely
to walk to school in the morning than girls.
In terms of land use variables for the to-school trip,
the percentage of single detached homes and land use

mix in the travel corridor are both statistically sig-
nificant in the model. Higher percentages of single
detached dwellings as well as more mixed land uses
decrease the odds of a student actively commuting to
school. Finally, as the density of street trees increases
in the travel corridor, so do the odds of a child using
active travel on the journey to school.
The model for journey home from school shows sim-
ilar results. Distance to school, median household in-
come, and maximum traffic in the buffer were again
related to decreased odds of using active travel modes,

and males were 1.5 times as likely to walk or bike home
from school (Table 2). A few differences were found
between the two models, as the percentage of single de-
tached homes, land use mix, and density of street trees
were not statistically significant in the school to resi-
dence model. Additionally, crossing major streets and
increased connectivity also appear as significant char-
acteristics in the school-to-home, but not the home-
to-school model. Crossing major streets decreased the
odds of using active modes to get home from school, and
intersection density increased the likelihood of walking
or biking home from school.

Discussion

As expected, distance between home and school was
the most important variable in models predicting the
mode of travel for the journey to and from school. Sim-
ply put, children will not use active travel modes, even
in supportive environments, if distances are too long. In
recognition of this fact, the local school boards provide
bus service for students who live beyond 1.6 kilometers
(1 mile) from school. On the other hand, if the resi-
dence and school are close enough, most children will
use active travel modes, even in environments that are

otherwise unsupportive of walking or cycling (e.g., 94
percent of children living within 400 meters of school
use an active mode of travel home from school). It is
at the intermediate distances where other built envi-
ronment variables likely come into play. In this study,
key environmental variables include density, land use
mix, street trees, the crossing of major streets, and in-
tersection density (street connectivity). Other variables
of particular interest were vehicular traffic, gender, and
median household income. These findings have direct
implications for planners, public health professionals,
and local school boards seeking to increase rates of ac-
tive commuting to and from school.

Relevant Environmental Characteristics

The role of street trees is commonly ignored in the
academic literature on children’s travel behaviors. At
least one other study found street trees to be an im-
portant predictor (McMillan 2003), and this study adds
to the evidence. Street trees provide shade from the
sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays, thereby providing a safer
and, during hot weather, more enjoyable journey. Shade
could be of even greater importance in cities with
warmer climates or more sunny climates than London,
Ontario. Furthermore, beyond their shading properties,
street trees contribute to improved neighborhood aes-
thetics, which can influence how people perceive the
walking (and even social) environment and increase
the desire for both children and their parents to walk to
school. This finding is particularly important because
changes to land uses or the street system are difficult
and long-term changes; tree planting programs are a
relatively easy, affordable, and rapid way to alter an
environment to encourage active travel to school.
Increased land use mix is commonly attributed to
higher rates of walking among adults (Frank, Engelke,
and Schmid 2003), as it increases potential destinations
available within a short distance. The relationship to
children’s travel is less clear. This study provides fur-
ther evidence that areas of mixed land use might be a
negative factor for young children actively traveling to
school. This finding clearly needs additional evidence
and elaboration, as the entropy variable used is a coarse
measure of mix. Older, main street environments with
stores fronting sidewalks can have very different influ-
ences than more suburban strip malls with parking lots
and high volumes of vehicular traffic. More recent retail
developments commonly include large parking lots de-
signed for automobile travel, which can create parental
traffic safety concerns. Likewise, industrial areas, recre-

ational areas, and retail uses would also be expected to
have different effects on the travel decisions made by or
for children. Few measures of use mixture have explored
what is actually being captured or proxied by this vari-
able. It is important to understand these issues, as they
likely have different impacts on adults and children.
Residential density is another variable that can have
different relationships to adult and children’s travel. In
studies with adults, increased residential densities are
consistently associated with increased walking levels,
but results for studies involving younger populations
are mixed (Ewing, Schroeer, and Greene 2004). This
study supports the belief that the relationship for chil-
dren is in the same direction as for adults, with routes
that are predominantly single, detached dwellings de-
creasing the likelihood of walking to school. Residential
neighborhoods appear to be better than areas of mixed
used in increasing the probability of actively commut-
ing to school, but the presence of mixed housing types
appears to also be important. Why this might be the
case is not clear. It might be that the variable used in
this study is a proxy for other real and perceived char-
acteristics of the built environment.
Traffic volume, intersection density (or connectiv-
ity), and major street crossings are all interrelated, but
no significant cross-correlation was present and the
variables in the study appear to be picking up different
elements of the travel environment. This could relate
to how variables representing these features were mea-
sured: Intersection density is an area-based measure,
maximum traffic simply relates to the highest traffic
volume on any street within the route buffer, and the
number of major streets crossed is the number of arte-
rials and highways crossed in each route. Combined,
however, they all relate to issues of traffic safety. Multi-
ple studies have reported that parental safety concerns
are a basic reason why children do not actively com-
mute to school (DiGuiseppi et al. 1998; Bradshaw 2001;
Collins and Kearns 2001; Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley
2004; Boarnet, Anderson, et al. 2005; McMillan 2005).
The crossing of major streets was explored in a previ-
ous American study (Schlossberg et al. 2006) but was
not shown to be a significant predictor. Here, major
street crossings were statistically significant in only one
travel direction, from the school to the residence, but
were missing on the journey to school. Likewise, inter-
section density increased the likelihood of using active
travel on the way home but not to school. Although this
suggests that large numbers of crossings, as long as they
are minor streets, are not problematic for pedestrians, it
is not clear why the models show this to be significant

in one direction only. The study does show that parents
are more likely to accompany children to school than
home and that more children actively travel on the re-
turn trip, probably because of differences in the oppor-
tunities for working adults to pick up their children in
the afternoon. Parents might assess environmental haz-
ards like street crossing differently when their children
are walking without supervision, so it is reasonable that
different variables come into play in these decisions, but
the interplay between these issues is not clear. Results
for traversing a street segment with high traffic volume
were more straightforward, as this was found to be a
negative factor for active travel for trips both to and
from school.
Following the results of previous literature (McMil-
lan et al. 2006; Vovsha and Petersen 2005; Frank, Kerr,
et al. 2007), the influence of neighborhood median
household income, a key indicator of an area’s socioeco-
nomic status, was associated with rates of active travel.
Neighborhoods of higher household income levels were
linked to lower rates of active travel on both the jour-
ney to and from school. Income obviously proxies many
other relationships: Families with higher income might
have more flexible working hours or might only have
one parent working, which allows parents to drive their
children to or from school. How these dynamics work
is unknown, however, as the children’s travel literature
has barely approached this question. Children’s prefer-
ences might also play a role, but it is important to em-
phasize that stated preferences should not be equated
with the modes children would actually use if given
the opportunity. Nevertheless, the results do suggest
that there is an unmet demand for more active travel
among the students sampled in this study. Whether this
demand is related to a desire for a different travel expe-
rience, more autonomy for parents, or other factors is
not known.
Findings for gender were similar to previous work,
as boys were more likely to actively travel than girls
(Evenson et al. 2003; Fulton et al. 2005; McMillan et al.
2006; Merom et al. 2006; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan
2008), but the reasons for these differences are not clear.
Researchers have pointed to parental fears, as girls are
more likely to be the targets of “stranger danger,” such as
kidnapping or sexual abuse, than boys, but also to social
beliefs about what are and are not appropriate activities
for boys and girls (Evenson et al. 2003; Fulton et al.
2005; Merom et al. 2006; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan
2008). Furthermore, the differences could relate to the
concept of gendered spaces and how environments can
land, and Hess
influence boys and girls differently (Clampet-Lundquist
et al. 2006).

Implications for Planners, Researchers, and School
Boards

The findings from this study have direct implica-
tions for planners, public health professionals, and local
school boards for increasing rates of active commuting
to and from school. Foremost, because of the impor-
tance of distance to active travel, school boards should
put extra thought into how siting decisions will affect
travel modes and the benefits that come from walking,
cycling, and other active modes. Furthermore, planners
and developers should build and retrofit communities to
be more conducive to active forms of travel, with special
attention paid to how traffic affects children’s travel and
with good street environments including street trees.
Rates of active travel were 10 percent higher for the
journey home from school, suggesting that there are
important differences between the two trips. Almost 60
percent of students reported that the driver of their ve-
hicle was going somewhere else (besides home) after the
drop-off, suggesting that there is a strong link between
children’s school trip mode and parents’ commuting
patterns. A reasonable explanation for increased walk-
ing rates home from school is that parents are still at
work and unavailable to pick up children when schools
get out during midafternoon. This does not mean that
the built and social environment does not come into
play in both directions but rather that there is a link
between household dynamics and, in particular, be-
tween parents’ and children’s commuting patterns
(McDonald 2008; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008).

Limitations and Strengths

Although this research moves beyond the typical
ecological study, a few limitations do exist. Researchers
could not identify the actual route a child takes to
school; rather, the shortest distance between home and
school, or probable route, was used. Another poten-
tial criticism of this research might be directed at the
fact that due to ethics board requirements, home postal
codes were used rather than exact addresses. In addi-
tion, parental response rates on certain social variables
such as income and educational attainment were too
low for this study.
This study aims to make advancements within the
literature through the use of route-based analysis,

thus improving the modeling of the environmental
characteristics to which children are potentially
exposed. Using a corridor-based measure to examine
environmental characteristics is an important ad-
vancement in the knowledge related to school travel
and perhaps more relevant than the spatial aggregation
used in neighborhood-based studies. Recent work has
examined aspects of the shortest path (Schlossberg
et al. 2006; Timperio et al. 2006), but this study adds
additional dimensions. Schlossberg et al. (2006) used a
buffer of 200 meters on either side of the shortest path
to measure environmental characteristics. This created
a 400-meter-wide corridor between each participant’s
residence and school in which environmental attributes
were examined. The researchers did not discuss how
they determined the buffer distance they used along
the route. A zone 200 meters wide on each side as used
by Schlossberg et al. (2006) is very large and would
incorporate environments that would be several blocks
away from the actual route. These would be averaged
with the characteristics of the immediate environment
along the route, decreasing variability in the data and
creating aggregation errors. This study used a distance
of 50 meters. Although there is not adequate theory to
guide the selection of this buffer distance, 50 meters was
used to ensure that only one street was examined and
increase the variability in the data. In making a deci-
sion to walk or not (or in making the decision for their
child), people might evaluate their image of the general
environment in an area that extends beyond their
potential walking route. For example, people might
think about their general neighborhood environment
rather than visualizing their particular travel route, or
they might, in some way, combine different types of
assessment. This is an important question of environ-
mental psychology, but how this evaluative process
occurs is not known. Therefore, the decision was made
to capture the immediate built environment that a
pedestrian would be directly exposed to, about half a
block on either side of the route. A narrower buffer

distance was determined not to capture much of the
built environment beyond the street right-of-way itself.
A wider buffer often extended to blocks adjacent to the
route and would reduce the variability of measured en-

vironments among the modeled routes. This study also
assessed more aspects of the route environment, aside
from intersection density, route directness, and major
street crossings. Land use mix, presence of street trees or

sidewalks, traffic volume, crime, and the percentage of
single detached homes were all examined at the route
level.

In conclusion, distance between home and school
was the most important determinant, but factors of the
built and social environment did play a role. School
siting should be an important issue not only for school
boards but also for planning and public health profes-
sionals. Location of schools plays a vital role in the dis-
tances students must travel between home and school,
and shorter distances are the best way to encourage ac-
tive journeys to and from school and promote a form
physical activity that is naturally built into their daily
lives. The use of active travel to school will not solve
the obesity epidemic, but it is one step toward increasing
daily levels of physical activity among children.