Association of children’s mobility and wellbeing: A case study in Hong Kong

This study focuses on primary school children in Hong Kong, where their 1) travel behaviour and mobility
(school and scheduled activities), 2) autonomy in their daily lives (perceptions and self-esteem), 3) psychological 
wellbeing (how they rate their happiness in different situations) and 4) interrelationships of
the above three aspects were investigated. The research team surveyed 393 primary school students at
two selected schools, through face-to-face questionnaire surveys using a variety of question types, such
as multiple choice, ordered category items and semantic differential ratings, providing respondents with
the opportunity to convey their views within a reasonably structured format. It was found that a majority
of children’s journeys associated with school and scheduled activities were completed on foot or by public 
transport, with over 80% accompanied by an adult. As expected, children engaging in active transport
rated their journeys as happier than those using motorised transport. Accompanied children also rated
their journeys as happier than their unaccompanied counterparts, suggesting that more research about
independent mobility from the perspective of the children themselves is needed. Children who perceived
themselves more capable of taking care of themselves independently rated their lives as happier than
those perceiving themselves to be less able. The findings of this study suggest that children’s wellbeing
can be affected by many factors, including their own self-esteem, perceived road safety, active travel and
independent mobility, amongst other factors. Cities should plan for neighbourhoods that are safer for
children to use, socialise and travel in, for the sake of promoting children’s wellbeing.


1. Background                                                                         
											
‘Mobility’ refers to ‘‘[t]he ability to move or be moved freely and                   
easily” (Oxford Dictionary, 2015). In transport geography, this                       
broadly translates to how easily individuals move or are moved                       
(via one or multiple transport modes) from one place to another                       
through the transport system. Gauging mobility requires a good                        
understanding of humans’ travel behaviour through the transport                       
system to engage in different activities, separated by space                          
(Rodrigue et al., 2006). There has been an increasing body of literature 
in recent years dedicated to research on children’s travel                      
behaviour and mobility, often described as 1) whether children’s                      
journeys are made independently, i.e. unaccompanied or unsupervised 
by adults; and 2) whether active (non-motorised) transport                      
modes, like walking and cycling, are used (Fyhri et al., 2011; Lam                    
											
and Loo, 2014; Waygood and Kitamura, 2009; Harten and Olds,
2004; Armstrong, 1993).
Very much intertwined with mobility, the concept of ‘‘wellbeing” 
can be dissected into three facets: psychological, social and
physical (Pressman et al., 2013). Especially in the context of psychological 
wellbeing, which is further differentiated by Dolan and
Metcalfe (2012) into evaluative (overall satisfaction), experiential
(momentary emotions) and eudemonic (purpose and selfactualisation) 
measures, the relationship between travel behaviour
and different measures of psychological wellbeing of children is
not well understood. While eudemonic wellbeing does not have
any immediate linkage with children’s travel behaviour, measures
of overall and momentary wellbeing have practical psychological,
social and economic applications (e.g. Helliwell and Barrington-Leigh, 2010) a
nd have been used in geographical time-space analysis 
of everyday activities (e.g. Schwanen and Wang, 2014),
amongst various other disciplines.
More specifically in terms of children’s mobility and wellbeing,
Ramanathan et al. (2014), Romero (2015) and Westman et al.
(2013) show that active mobility among children is linked to various 
psychosocial benefits in momentary wellbeing in the western											

world, but whether this holds true in an East Asian context is not
well studied. Also, whether independent and active travel amongst
primary school children is associated with more positive evaluative 
wellbeing (e.g. life satisfaction) remains to be examined in
both the western and East Asian contexts. This study also introduces 
a fresh perspective in investigating children’s scheduled
activities and associated travels, in addition to the more typical
studies that only discuss journeys to and from school. Investigation
of children’s scheduled activities are an important complement to
the general children’s mobility literature. This study thus serves as
the starting point to fill in these research gaps, in order to better
understand the different dimensions of active and independent
travel of children. This study also investigates how children’s travel
characteristics, amongst other key factors, affect wellbeing of children, 
in experiential (momentary) and evaluative (overall) terms.
This study draws upon the above literature to examine the
question of whether higher levels of mobility and autonomy for
children have any effect on attitudinal measures of psychological
wellbeing, through the children’s lens. Through questionnaire surveys, 
it is possible to consider how children rate different experiences 
(momentary wellbeing) and evaluate the domains of
school and life in general (overall wellbeing), via the concept of
‘‘happiness”. It is easier for primary school students to understand
and describe how ‘‘happy” they are, instead of relatively more difficult 
concepts such as ‘‘satisfaction” or ‘‘wellbeing”. Furthermore,
children’s own perceptions of their surroundings and self-confidence 
in daily life provide a voice for the children themselves,
such as in previous work by Page et al. (2010) and Tonucci and
Rissotto (2001). Children’s perspectives are important and deserve
more research and recognition. Parents have considerable influence 
over their child’s travel, so listening directly to the child’s
views, as this study intends, provides an opportunity for adults
to work towards improving children’s psychological wellbeing
with a better comprehension of children’s own perceived capabilities 
and preferences.
Age is a major factor in influencing levels of independent mobility 
among children, and is often a determinant of when children
are ready to safely navigate the street network and neighbourhood
environment alone (e.g. Fyhri et al., 2011; Lam and Loo, 2014). The

concept of mobility licences was first proposed by Hillman et al.
(1990) to identify when parents would allow their children to do
certain things outside of home independently, such as to cross
roads, go out after dark, leave school, etc. Parental perceptions on
neighbourhood safety and belief in their child’s ability to navigate
these potential hazards have already been shown to greatly influence 
children’s travel behaviour (Susilo and Liu, 2015; Waygood
and Susilo, 2015; Alparone and Pacilli, 2012; Panter et al., 2010).
The Italian study by Alparone and Pacilli (2012, p. 113) studied this
as the ‘‘maternal perception of positive potentiality of outdoor
autonomy”, i.e. how the mother decides if her child is ready to navigate 
the outdoors independently, judged by daily ability to take
care of themselves, being responsible, socialising skills, and other
factors. With parental concerns discussed quite widely in the literature, 
this study’s incorporation of children’s own self confidence
and perceptions, as discussed in the above paragraph, is a contribution 
to the literature from a novel, understudied angle.
Formulated from the above and based on the Hong Kong context, 
a conceptual model has been constructed and is shown in
Fig. 1. Conceptually speaking, this study aims to examine children’s
overall wellbeing, in particular their satisfaction with life, with the
factors of 1) children’s socio-demographic characteristics, 2) their
activities, 3) travel behaviour, 4) self-confidence, perceptions and
knowledge and 5) momentary wellbeing. The specific dimensions
marked by asterisks fall within the scope of this study, listed along
with some other important factors that are worth future consideration, 
though this is by no means an exhaustive list. To be specific,
a list of aims based on the conceptual model is detailed henceforth.
The first aim of this paper is to study children’s travel behaviour for
journeys to and from school and all scheduled activities, among
selected groups of Hong Kong primary school children, and how
the travel characteristics vary for children of different age and gender. 
The second aim is to understand children’s subjective feelings
of their happiness of different experiences (momentary wellbeing)
and in the domains of school and life in general (overall wellbeing),
in terms of children’s age, gender and travel characteristics. The
third and final aim is to tie all the strings together, in terms of children’s 
socio-demographic characteristics, self-confidence, perceptions, 
travel behaviour and momentary wellbeing. This
analysing children’s mobility and wellbeing.

contributes to achieving the ultimate aim of this study, which is to
understand the predictors of children’s life satisfaction, and point a
possible way forward for policymakers to improve children’s lives
in the East Asian context.

2. Methodology

This paper’s methodology is based mainly on questionnaire surveys, 
conducted on both children and parents. This was considered
to be the most suitable way to collect data of subjective perceptions 
and feelings across a large number of school children, supplemented 
by data on their school travel characteristics provided by
their parents. Through using a variety of question types, such as
multiple choice, ordered category items and semantic differential
ratings, the questionnaire surveys provided respondents with the
opportunity to convey their views within a reasonably structured
format.
The child questionnaires were administered by a team of
trained research assistants via face-to-face interviews with children 
at their schools. Data were collected about 1) their subjective
feelings of wellbeing in their travel and daily life, conceptualised
under the umbrella of ‘‘happiness”, which can be easily understood
by children, 2) questions regarding confidence in self-care ability
and perception of road-crossing safety in Hong Kong and 3) the
duration, number, type and travel characteristics of their scheduled 
activities. Data with respect to children’s reported ‘‘happiness” 
were measured across five items of momentary wellbeing,
namely happiness during 1) the journey to school, 2) the journey
from school, 3) physical education (PE) lesson, 4) computer games
and 5) outdoor play and two items of overall wellbeing, namely
happiness with 1) school overall and 2) life in general. The questions 
were asked beginning ‘‘How happy are you in the following
situations?” and children answered along a ten-point semantic differential 
scale, with ‘‘very happy” and ‘‘very unhappy” at 1 and 10
respectively. Difficult language was avoided in order to enable children 
to easily understand the question. Apart from ‘‘affective experience” 
of children during travel, previously explored in the
literature (e.g. Westman et al., 2013; Romero, 2015), this study
design incorporated the proposition that PE lessons, computer
games and outdoor play with friends and classmates may also be
sources of fun, enjoyment and happiness (O’Reilly et al., 2001;
Alexander et al., 2015). Questions regarding self-care ability and
perception of road-crossing safety in Hong Kong, on the other
hand, were answered along a 5-point scale of ordered categories,
with ‘‘strongly agree” and ‘‘strongly disagree” at either end. The
parent questionnaire was distributed to all child participants’ parents, 
asking them to report their child’s travel characteristics in
journeys to/ from school. The data from both the child and parent
questionnaires together have enabled subsequent statistical analysis 
of reported measures of wellbeing along key variables such as
age, gender and travel behaviour. The collected data correspond
with the three major aims of this study, and provide a thorough
understanding of primary school children’s own views.
The study’s focus on primary school children is chiefly due to
practical considerations. It is the most obvious arena for in-depth
investigation of a wide variation of children – who are still at an
early stage of learning and development – by key variables such
as gender, age, household background and neighbourhood characteristics. 
They would otherwise be difficult to investigate in a non-school 
environment. This study may also serve as a starting point
for future school-based education programmes that encourage
increased walking to school and increased children’s independent
mobility, while taking into consideration their psychological wellbeing. 
To include students of different demographic, household
and neighbourhood backgrounds, invitation letters were sent to

60 randomly selected Hong Kong primary schools per batch in
the 1) fully government-financed (government and aided) and 2)
non-fully government financed (Direct Subsidy Scheme, English
Schools Foundation, Private Independent School scheme and private) 
primary school categories, using the official list of schools
in Hong Kong as published by the Education Bureau (2013).
After three batches of initial contacting by mail in category 1
and two batches in category 2, one school from each category
responded positively. The study, therefore, included one
Cantonese-medium government aided school (category 1) and
one English-medium English Schools Foundation school (category
2). Fieldwork was carried out over five days from November
2015 to January 2016. Invitation letters were sent to all students’
parents in both schools prior to the respective survey days in order
to indicate whether consent would be given for their children to
participate in the study. The survey respondents consisted of 393
students from the two schools, with around 35 students per grade
from Primary 1 to 6 (roughly six to twelve years old) during the
survey days by a team of trained research assistants.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. School and associated journeys

School travel data were provided by children’s parents
(n = 281), describing their child’s travel mode, time taken and
accompaniment in their journeys from home to school and
back. This sub-section shall thoroughly discuss children’s school
travel, in terms of active and independent travel, travel mode
and travel time, which contributes to the understanding of
children’s travel behaviour with respect to their age and gender.
Children’s wellbeing in both momentary and overall terms is
also discussed with respect to their school travel characteristics,
in order to better understand their interrelationships in
descriptive terms.
For continuity and better understanding of the effect of possible
after-school play and other activities on happiness ratings, the
whole journey associated with children’s travel from school to
return back home is analysed, as shown in Tables 1–3 below. From
Table 1, school bus was the main transport mode, for 39% of children. 
This was followed closely by walking at 28% and bus (including 
minibus) at 10%. Rail, ferry and car had around 7–8% of the
share each. Happiness ratings of their journeys departing school
was the highest for ferry (8.84), followed by walking (8.47) and
school bus (8.13). Students travelling from school back home by
bus/ minibus (7.90) rated their journeys as less happy, and lower
still were travellers by rail and car (both 7.64).
After the above overview of travel modes and happiness particular 
to the journey departing school, the discussion is expanded to
happiness ratings in terms of both momentary and overall

wellbeing. Using the Mann-Whitney U test to compare the means                                    
of happiness ratings grouped by active versus motorised travel in                                
their journey departing school, some enlightening results were                                   
found, as shown in Table 2. The main consideration for using the                                 
Mann-Whitney U test was to use a more lenient, non-parametric                                    
test which does not assume normality and is able to accommodate                                  
for variables where normality is uncertain, with various applications 
in transportation studies, especially in terms of travel-related 
perceptions/ attitudinal measures along a rated scale (e.g.                              
Xu et al., 2009; Minhans et al., 2014; Dallen, 2007). Happiness ratings 
were higher nearly all across the board, in particular with happiness 
in PE class and when playing outdoors with friends, both                                  
significant to the p < 0.01 and p < 0.05 levels respectively. While                              
not definitive across all happiness items, children engaging in
walking journeys to depart school rated their journeys happier
than compared with those departing school by motorised modes.                                    
These walking children also found more enjoyment in active pursuits. 
This is in line with findings by Romero (2015) and                                                                 
Ramanathan et al. (2014), which found that children who walked
Age (years old)
for school travel had more positive moods.                                                        
For companionship, as seen in Table 3, the vast majority (nearly                                                 
90%) of children were accompanied by adults during some or the                                     
entire part of their journeys departing school, with 63% of these                                 
children being accompanied by their parents or bus drivers/ nannies. 
Happiness ratings were the lowest for children with independent 
travel, though it is important to note that there were very few                               
such children, and nearly half of them were in the 11- to 12-year-old 
category. Again using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney

U test, the comparison of means testing was inconclusive
(p = 0.186), and further testing with other happiness ratings with
presence of independent mobility on the school-home journey also
yielded no significant results. However, it is still intriguing to note
that independent travellers seem to be less happy on their school
journeys than their adult-accompanied counterparts. This is a
pathway worth exploring in future studies, as the psychological
wellbeing of children during travel is still understudied. For example, 
children rated their journeys on school buses quite highly,
which may indicate a preference for children to be with other students 
of the same school. This interaction is possible on a school
bus journey, but not if the child is, for example, driven directly
home by his or her parents, or if he or she walks home alone.

Finally, regarding travel time in Table 4, students on average
spent 27–30 min one way for school-associated travels, with girls
travelling slightly longer. Travel duration did appear to differ by
age but revealed no particular pattern. School travel time for the
selected participants in this study are around double the one-way 
average travel time, at 13 and 14 min, for primary school children 
in the United Kingdom and Queensland, Australia respectively
(National Travel Survey, 2014; Department of Transport and Main
Roads, 2012). While this study does not claim to represent characteristics 
of Hong Kong-wide school travel, the figure of 27–30 min
corresponds relatively well with Hong Kong’s figure of 38 min from
the Transport Department (2014) for home-based travel to school
(inclusive of all full-time students, regardless of primary, secondary 
or other levels of education).

3.2. Scheduled activities and associated journeys

With scheduled activities being a common part of Hong Kong
children’s daily lives, an analysis of the type, number and associated 
travel of children’s scheduled activities is another important
aspect of this study, along with the relationship with children’s travel 
behaviour. This sub-section complements the previous discussion 
about school travel, in terms of understanding children’s
scheduled activities by age and gender, while at the same time
considering their associated travel behaviour. Scheduled activities
are becoming more common in increasingly urbanised and highpressure 
global cities with a large middle-class segment, and with

Hong Kong as one of the more extreme examples (Karsten, 2014),
this study provides a lesser studied dimension for understanding
children’s travel behaviour.
The scheduled activities and associated travel were selfreported 
by children, and further categorised based on the
Education Bureau’s (2012) scheduled activity typology, namely 1)
academic, 2) sports, 3) art, 4) interest/ hobby and 5) service. Table 5
shows some examples of these out-of-home activities that surveyed 
children took part in.
Categorised using the above typology, Tables 6–8 describe
activities that the child respondents participated in with respect
to the activity type, activity duration and associated travel characteristics, 
such as travel time and presence of adult accompaniment.
From Table 6, it is evident that walking was the main associated
travel mode for close to two fifths of the total number of the children’s 
scheduled activities, closely followed by private car at just
under a quarter, bus/ minibus at 17% and rail at 12%. In this respect,
though active travel is only associated with 38% of children’s activities, 
there are over three quarters of the activities where the children 
(often with one or both their parents) walk or take public
transport to attend these scheduled activities.
Table 7 shows that the vast majority of children’s activities –
over four fifths – had associated travel accompanied by an adult,
with nearly one half of which being the mother. This indicates
the traditional role of the mother being responsible first and foremost 
to taking care of their children, in this case with respect to the
choice of and travel for scheduled out-of-home activities. This is in
line with findings in Karsten’s (2014) small-scale pilot study on
middle-class parents in Hong Kong, where it was acknowledged
that mothers in particular exhibited intensive parenting in ‘‘choosing, 
communicating and supervising extracurricular activities” (p.
567), and also Holloway and Pimlott-Wilson’s (2014) British study,
which found that especially in middle class families, chauffeuring
children between scheduled activities represented an important
commitment for mothers, and a basis for the child-centred organisation 
of family time.
Table 8 gives an overview of the scheduled activities by the
number of activities, minutes of activities per week and associated
travel time per week. As a whole, the surveyed children had 2.61
weekly scheduled activities, with 9- to 12-year-olds averaging at
around 3 per week and 5- and 6-year-olds at less than two per
week. In terms of time spent participating in scheduled activities
each week, once again, 9- to 12-year-olds averaged far higher than
their younger schoolmates, at nearly six hours per week. 5- to 8-
year-olds still spent over three hours per week participating in
scheduled activities. Associated travel time was higher for older
students, and understandably so as they would be expected to be
capable of travelling longer distances and begin to become more
independent. Children aged 5–6 reported less than one hour per



week on average for travel related to scheduled activities, while
the same figure for children aged 11–12 was closer to two hours.
For travel characteristics associated with scheduled activities overall, 
gender differences were negligible.
Time spent on academic and arts activities generally increased
with age, but the same figure for sports activities appeared to drop
somewhat. This is possibly indicative of upper years having mor
homework and their need to manage pre-secondary school preparations 
(entrance examinations, interviews, visits and the like),
leading to the lower participation in sports activities. Also worth
pointing out is the gender difference in participation for academic,
sports and arts activities. Girls participated in academic and arts
activities for about 27% and 133% longer than boys per week on
average, while boys participated in sports activities for about 65%
longer than girls per week on average. This shows that parents of
children in this study do arrange for different types of activities
somewhat in accordance with their child’s gender, which was also
the case for some families in Holloway and Pimlott-Wilson’s
(2014) study.

3.3. Wellbeing and associated factors

Regarding children’s psychological wellbeing and its relationship 
with children’s age, gender and travel behaviour, this study
continues to use children’s self-reported activity data, happiness
ratings as well as measures of their self-confidence and perceptions 
for analysis. This sub-section contributes to understanding
various aspects of children’s momentary and overall wellbeing,
along with how these happiness ratings are associated with
descriptive measures of age, gender and travel behaviour. Ultimately, 
these results all culminate to the comprehensive, major
contribution of this study, in tying all strands of analysis together
to develop a model explaining life satisfaction of children in Hong
Kong.
In understanding momentary and overall wellbeing, this study
employed the semantic differential scale, which enabled children
to determine how they would feel in different situations, via simple 
vocabulary, i.e. the polar opposites of ‘‘very happy” and ‘‘very
unhappy”. Graphical overviews by age and gender are shown in
Figs.2 and 3 respectively
From Fig. 2, there was a recurring phenomenon of happiness
ratings for 8- or 9-year-olds being slightly lower than children both
younger and older than them, such as 8-year-olds in to-school travel, 
school overall and life in general, and 9-year-olds in fromschool 
travel, PE class and playing computer games. In short, the
happiness ratings dipped slightly for 8- or 9-year-olds, and the reason 
would require further investigation to confirm whether this is
only peculiar to this particular set of students, or whether this is a
wider phenomenon. One conjecture could be that 8- and 9-yearold 
students, at around Primary 3, were being subjected to Hong
Kong’s Territory-wide System Assessment (TSA) preparation and
examinations during the survey period, and as a result rated their
happiness as lower. While this is not the foremost focus of this
study, it would be helpful for policymakers, educators and scholars
alike to continue their discussion and research in order to confirm
whether the Primary 3 TSA exams have played a part in causing
children to be less happy.
To test for differences across age groups and with little linear
directional cues to consider, ANOVA was employed and significant
differences between different age groups were found for happiness
during to-school travel, playing computer games and for satisfaction 
with school overall, significant to the p < 0.01, p < 0.05 and
p < 0.05 levels respectively, as seen from Table 9. This lends some
evidence especially in terms of there being a level of dislike – at
the very least, lesser enjoyment – for the journey to school and

for school overall amongst children aged 8 or 9, that is around Primary 3.
From Fig. 3, there were considerable gender differences for
from-school travel, playing computer games and outdoor play, at
0.34, 0.82 and 0.34 higher for boys than for girls. Boys feeling happier 
than girls while ‘‘playing on computer games with friends” is
in line with findings in the literature that found boys to be more
likely to play and be dependent on computer games: those dependent 
on computer games regarded the experience as ‘‘fun, excitement, 
a challenge” (Griffiths and Hunt, 1998, p. 478). Similarly,
for ‘‘playing outdoors with friends”, boys enjoyed it more, which
is comparable with findings in an American study by Larson
et al. (2011, p. 9) which found that ‘‘more boys than girls went outdoors 
to just play or hang out” among other outdoor activities. It
may be possible to relate this finding with higher self-reported
enjoyment in boys’ travel while departing school, in comparison
with girls, possibly meaning more opportunities for outdoor play
and socialising with friends.

Overall, for all surveyed children (n = 393), the means of the
happiness items ranged from a low of 7.41 for the journey to
school, to a high of 8.87 for outdoor play with friends. Standard
deviation was highest for the computer game item. Differences
by gender were tested for using the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U
 test once again, and significant differences between
boys and girls were found for enjoyment of playing computer
games, as expected, at the p < 0.01 level, as seen in Table 10. Comparatively 
higher enjoyment for boys during outdoor play was
noted but not to a significant level. Boys did however enjoy their
travel departing school more than girls weakly significant to a
p < 0.1 level, confirming the earlier finding that was indicative of
boys being keen on enjoying their journeys home, perhaps via
after-school play or other activities, more so than girls.
Finally, the ultimate aim of this study is to gauge whether, and
if so how, children’s life satisfaction can be explained along the key
variables of age and gender, as well as momentary wellbeing, travel behaviour, 
scheduled activities and children’s self-confidence

and perceptions. The variable describing happiness with life in
general was used as the dependent variable, which was determined 
to be normal with its skewness and excess kurtosis within
an acceptable range ( 1.27 and 1.42 respectively). Statistical analysis 
by ordinary least squares linear regression was conducted.
Table 11 shows the table of coefficients from the model. Collinearity 
diagnostics were examined, and the VIF and condition indices
were of no concern. The model summary produced a satisfactory
R2 value of 0.266, which indicates that the model explains nearly
27% of the variability of the model. The p-value of the ANOVA
between group means of independent variables in this model stood
at p < 0.001, which is indicative of a strongly significant result.
From Table 11, momentary wellbeing for school travel, PE lessons 
and outdoor play items were all positive predictors for higher
happiness with life in general, at the p < 0.05 level (p < 0.01 for PE
lessons). The relationship of life satisfaction with momentary wellbeing 
in the computer game item was weakly significant, but with
a negative sign at the p < 0.1 level. This indicates that higher happiness 
while playing computer games is a weak predictor of poorer
overall wellbeing in terms of life satisfaction. Higher overall selfcare 
ability and overall perception of road-crossing safety in Hong
Kong were significant predictors for increased happiness of life in
general at the p < 0.1 and p < 0.05 levels respectively. This lends

support to the proposition that children’s increased confidence of
independent self-care ability can heighten satisfaction with life
in general, as can children’s perception of road-crossing in Hong
Kong as a whole to be safe for at-grade navigation.
Parental licence to cross roads, while significant at the p < 0.01
level, was unexpectedly negatively associated with the psychological 
wellbeing of the children. In other words, for children who said
they were allowed more often by their parents to cross roads alone
actually tended to rate their lives as less happy in general. Incidentally, 
this may also echo with the earlier finding for momentary
wellbeing that children who were accompanied in travel on average 
rated those journeys as happier than those travelling independently. 
This may at first glance seem to relate with the effect of age,
as there were more independent travellers in the older age groups.
However, after considering all variables in the model, increased
age was positively associated with overall life satisfaction at the
p < 0.05 level. Perhaps primary school children, regardless of age,
actually prefer to have an adult accompanying them to and from
school.
Finally, as different types of motorised travel may have different
relationships with children’s happiness with life in general, the primary 
travel modes for children’s school journeys were analysed
separately using dummy variables in the linear regression model,

instead of a binary analysis of active versus motorised travel
modes. Children using rail transport (mainly MTR) to depart school
were less happy with life in general (significant at the p < 0.05
level) when compared with the reference group of ‘‘walking”. This
may be indicative of rail transport being crowded and uncomfortable 
for children, and the need for modal transfer(s) when the MTR
is used. In contrast, children being picked up from school by car
were happier with life in general (significant to the p < 0.01 level)
when compared with walking. One distinct proposition here may
be that children from wealthier family backgrounds are able to
afford to put their children on school bus service or drive their children 
to/ from school, instead of having their children take the MTR,
and these children happen to rate their lives happier. Ultimately,
whether independent and/ or active travel predict children’s wellbeing, 
as a result of family background and socioeconomic status,
is outside the scope of this study, but would undoubtedly be
worthwhile for researchers to further investigate.
Other variables, such as gender, number of scheduled activities
in a week and independent travel for departing school were not
statistically significant at the p < 0.1 level. However, some of these
results’ directions do give some potential cues for further study.
For example, less weekly number of activities pointed toward predicting 
a higher life satisfaction rating. This may illustrate that children 
prefer fewer scheduled activities, perhaps a couple they
actually enjoy. This may serve as a starting point for investigation
with a wider sample of primary school children, to understand the
potential effects of scheduled activities and their associated travel
with self-reported ratings of psychological wellbeing, in addition
to the more usually investigated school travel characteristics, in
order to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the complex 
interplay between children’s mobility, wellbeing and their
own perceptions.

4. Conclusion

This study discussed children’s travel characteristics and psychological 
wellbeing (momentary and overall), along with their

interrelationships. Key findings that represent major contributions
to this study’s aims are summarised hereafter.
Over half of travel associated with scheduled activities and
departing from school were completed mainly on foot or by public
transport. Most children’s journeys were accompanied by adults,
especially for children aged 9 or under. Children’s momentary
wellbeing during travel was investigated, and results revealed happier 
school travel for active and accompanied journeys. Children
who walked to depart school rated these journeys considerably
happier than their counterparts who used motorised transport.
Furthermore, children who departed school walking rated PE lessons 
and outdoor play with friends as significantly happier than
their non-walking counterparts. Children travelling accompanied
by adults (particularly school bus drivers/ bus nannies) rated these
journeys happier than their independently travelling counterparts.
Regarding travel behaviour and momentary wellbeing, it seems
that increasing the rate of active travel and keeping the current status 
quo of low independent travel seems to be a viable way forward 
to improve primary schoolchildren’s momentary wellbeing.
Regarding children’s overall wellbeing, in particular their satisfaction 
with life, a linear regression model was used to identify
explanatory factors. Overall, happiness during school travel, PE
and outdoor play, children’s confidence in their self-care ability,
positive perception of road-crossing safety in Hong Kong and being
driven from school by car (relative to walking) were significant
predictors of increased psychological wellbeing. Happiness while
playing computer games with friends, parental licence provision
and using rail to depart school (relative to walking) were negative
predictors. In terms of improving overall psychological wellbeing, a
reasonable way forward may be to continue improving neighbourhood 
road safety in Hong Kong to enable children to feel safer
when using the road network, and also improve children’s selfesteem 
via teaching them the skills needed to better take care of
themselves.
In summary, using the conceptual model in Fig. 1, this study
explored the factors behind children’s life satisfaction, namely 1)
age and gender under socio-demographic characteristics, 2) their
school activities and extracurricular activities, 3) dimensions of

their travel behaviour, 4) their own estimation of self-care ability
and perception of the road environment and 5) both activityspecific 
and mobility-specific momentary wellbeing. The conceptual 
framework that this study has proposed allows researchers
to consider the children’s socio-demographic characteristics, their
activities, their travel behaviour, perceptions and momentary wellbeing 
in a holistic manner.
In moving forward, future research may consider complementing 
children’s own views with parental perception data, focusing
on child-parent differences in the perception of children’s capabilities, 
for better understanding of children’s mobility and wellbeing.
This would fit under the umbrella of perceptions, attitudes and
knowledge in the conceptual model, which may contribute to
shaping children’s overall wellbeing and life satisfaction. Future
studies may also examine other relevant socio-demographic characteristics 
and travel behaviour variables as listed in the conceptual 
model, such as children’s residential locations and their
actual travel routes to and from school respectively (Lam and
Loo, 2014). Actual – in addition to perceived – neighbourhood
characteristics may affect when children are granted mobility
licences by parents, and travel behaviour is also likely to be closely
related as well.
Considering the above conclusions and recommendations, it is
hoped that this study may enable policymakers to plan for and regulate 
neighbourhoods safe for children to use, socialise and travel
in. Children’s mobility and autonomy interact with wellbeing in a
complex manner. Further research would allow deeper investigation 
into the interplay between children’s travel behaviour and
parental concerns, alongside various facets of children’s wellbeing
and development.