Determinants of children’s active travel to school: A case study in Hong Kong                                                                               
abstract
This paper examines the prevalence of active travel to school and the associated determinants for Hong Kong
schoolchildren aged 5–12. Data were collected through questionnaire surveys, which provided information re-
lating to children’s travel characteristics for their journeys to school and personal/household socio-demographic
characteristics. Secondary data of the geography around children’s residences were also obtained, to better
understand surrounding street environment, public transit, open and green space and recreational facilities. The
geographical features within their residence neighbourhoods were mapped and enumerated. Binary logistic
regression modelling was conducted to understand the association between the status of children’s active travel
to school (binary dependent variable of ‘active travel’ versus ‘not active travel’) with socio-demographic and
geographical factors (independent variables). The results show that network distance from school and other
neighbourhood environment variables, such as street block size, public transit facilities and sport/ leisure venues, 
are highly signi<U+FB01>cant factors associated with active travel to school. A case study was conducted on one
selected primary school, where one third of participating children walked to school, with the majority of walkers
living within the neighbourhood of the school. Their most direct routes to school were 10–15 min walks involving 
1–2 at-grade crossings. Other pedestrian facilities in the area were also qualitatively examined on-site to
better understand the local geographical context of the case study area. The <U+FB01>ndings inform policy direction on
what needs to change for children to lead a healthier and more physically active lifestyle, including improvements 
in the neighbourhood environment.

1. Background and review                                                                    
											
In recent years, children’s active school travel (AST) has been                         
widely studied in the context of Europe (Pojani and Boussauw, 2014;                         
van Goeverden and de Boer, 2013; Shaw et al., 2013), North America                          
(Rothman et al., 2017; McDonald, 2007; Centers for Disease Control                          
and Prevention, 2004) and the Asia-Paci<U+FB01>c region (Wen et al., 2008;                         
Booth et al., 2007; Irawan and Sumi, 2011; Garrard, 2009). AST is wellknown 
to be an important contributor to physical health, with a multitude 
of favourable <U+FB01>tness and activity outcomes (Armstrong, 1993;                         
Santos et al., 2009; Cooper et al., 2003; Lubans et al., 2011; van Sluijs                   
et al., 2009), and has been shown to be positively associated with                          
psychological wellbeing and development (Leung and Loo, 2017;                               
Romero, 2015; Ramanathan et al., 2014). Despite the many advantages                         
of active travel, however, AST has been on the decline around the world                     
over the years. In Australia, Sydney’s percentage of children aged 5–9                      
walking to school fell from 58% in 1971 to 26% at the turn of the                           
century, while the national American rate of AST for school-aged                            
children fell from around 50% in 1969 to under 15% in 2004 (Garrard,                        

2009; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2004). In England,
where the rate of primary schoolchildren walking to school have remained 
relatively high at over 60% in 2010, this still marks a considerable 
decrease from the <U+FB01>gure of 81% recorded in 1971 (Shaw
et al., 2013). In an increasingly urbanised and motorised world, with
built surroundings “designed to prioritize cars”, the car culture is
deeply ingrained into all aspects of daily life, which explains AST’s
continuing decline (Rothman et al., 2017, p. 320).
Parents, as role models, and their attitudes to travel and road safety
together have considerable in<U+FB02>uence over their children activities and
travel behaviour (Lee et al., 2013; Muir et al., 2017). In cities, perceived
danger from heavy tra<U+FB03>c has led some parents to drive their children to
and from school, to be more assured of their children’s safety by reducing 
tra<U+FB03>c exposure (Hillman et al., 1990). However, this has been
shown to lead to more congestion especially near residential areas and
schools, and completes the vicious cycle of further reducing children’s
AST due to increased tra<U+FB03>c (Tsai et al., 2004). The root of this con<U+FB02>ict
appears to stem from the heightened expectations on a modern-day,
‘good’ parent, where on the one hand, children need to be protected

from dangerous people or situations, i.e. automobiles, strangers, etc.,
but at the same time need to be allowed the freedom to learn to navigate 
their neighbourhood and become independent (Valentine, 1997a).
On addressing this balance, the likeliest outcome has so far been more
in favour of safety <U+FB01>rst, which would translate to the current predicament 
of parents chau<U+FB00>euring their children to and from school and
other activities, or children being accompanied to and from school and
other activities by domestic helpers. This situation is common in Hong
Kong, the location of this present study, and in other Asian cities as well
(Karsten, 2014; Douglass, 2006).
At the city-level, studies have discussed AST’s associations with
socio-demographic characteristics, and separately with neighbourhood
environment attributes. Various studies have focused on AST’s relationship 
with gender, where boys were generally more likely to make
active journeys to school than girls (Leslie et al., 2010; McMillan et al.,
2006). Other factors that have been discussed in the literature on
children’s travel and physical activity literature include age and adult
accompaniment (Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002; Karsten, 2014; Hillman
et al., 1990; Rothman et al., 2017), household car ownership (Sener
et al., 2008; Panter et al., 2008) and presence of siblings (Leung et al.,
2019; Allbaugh et al., 2016; Price et al., 2017). Children seem more
likely to be physically active in travel and other activities if they are
older and require less accompaniment, come from non-car-available
households and have siblings. Regarding neighbourhood environment,
shorter journey distances, more interconnected streets and higher accessibility 
to local facilities, like sport and recreation facilities, parks,
playgrounds, etc., were associated with a higher likelihood of walking
to school (Kerr et al., 2006; Dalton et al., 2011; Panter et al., 2008;
Larsen et al., 2009). Parents’ perceptions of the quality and safety of the
surrounding neighbourhood environment also in<U+FB02>uence whether a
child travels to school actively. A neighbourhood that is perceived to be
dangerous and devoid of child-friendly facilities like parks and playgrounds 
would not likely encourage AST (Timperio et al., 2006; Lee
et al., 2013). Few studies in the literature comprehensively include all
the above perspectives together in their analysis (perhaps with the
exception of Pojani and Boussauw, 2014).
In Hong Kong, education policy broadly encourages attendance of
schools situated within children’s own residential neighbourhoods
through the allocation of public school places according to children’s
home locations (Loo and Lam, 2015). Attending school closer to home
within the neighbourhood catchment area seems to be a straightforward 
and bene<U+FB01>cial decision. It is less of a burden for children because
they do not need to travel as far to go to school, and it is also easier for
their family members where supervision, if necessary, becomes less
time-consuming and more convenient. More a<U+FB04>uent families may even
move to di<U+FB00>erent neighbourhoods where parents perceive there to be
better school quality and provision of facilities and amenities (Lam and
Loo, 2014, 2015), although school quality is just one of many possible
reasons for moving home to another location (Yu and Zhu, 2015). Alternatively, 
some parents choose the option of sending their children to
private schools, which have larger region-wide and even Hong Kong-wide 
catchment areas. Despite the high school tuition fees of private

schools, the quality of the education is perceived to be better than
public schools (Bray and Kwok, 2003). Around one <U+FB01>fth of all Hong
Kong primary schools are part of the private sector (Education Bureau,
2013).
With this backdrop in mind, it is important to include both public
and private schools for a more comprehensive overview of the status of
AST in Hong Kong. In this part of the world, AST has only been discussed 
as a side note in the investigation of children’s independent
mobility, via secondary data from a territory-wide travel-diary style
survey (Lam and Loo, 2014). The study showed a rate of just over 50%
for primary school children walking to school in their sample, based on
a snapshot of the travel characteristics of a section of Hong Kong’s
population, including primary school-age children, in 2002. With more
than a decade gone by, there is an imperative need to more comprehensively 
understand the status of, and factors associated with, AST for
Hong Kong primary school children in the present day, inclusive of
those in public and private schools. This study aims to provide an extensive 
scope of study in the Hong Kong context, to better understand,
visualise and analyse the association of AST with the relevant personal
and household socio-demographic characteristics, as well as neighbourhood 
environment attributes around their residences. This study is
well-positioned to inform international readers about children’s AST in
the context of Hong Kong in East Asia, with its dense and compact
urban form that shapes AST in di<U+FB00>erent ways and draws conclusions
di<U+FB00>erent from studies from other locales. Findings complement previous 
children’s mobility literature along individual, household and
neighbourhood lines (Lam and Loo, 2014). Three research questions are
proposed, as follows:

1) What is the level of AST in Hong Kong children, by age and gender?
2) How does the neighbourhood environment a<U+FB00>ect rates of AST?
3) What personal and household socio-demographic characteristics are
associated with more AST?

This study seeks to provide answers to the above questions and
move toward a broader perspective in understanding children’s AST in
dense and highly motorised cities like Hong Kong. Through the <U+FB01>ndings, 
policymakers may better plan for and maintain neighbourhoods
that are more walking-friendly, especially for vulnerable groups such as
children and the elderly, and also formulate active travel policies that
target relevant groups of children and other transport-disadvantaged
groups.

2. Methodology

The study incorporated questionnaire survey, GIS and on-site <U+FB01>eld
observation data to provide a comprehensive basis for approaching and
answering the research questions. The <U+FB02>ow of the data collection and
analysis process is shown in Table 1. The following sub-sections will
detail and elaborate upon each step of the methodology, from data
collection to data analysis methods.

2.1. Data collection

In the <U+FB01>rst step, invitation letters for survey participation were sent
in randomly selected batches of primary schools in Hong Kong
(Education Bureau, 2013). Four schools replied positively, three public
and one private, corresponding relatively well with the public–private
ratio of primary schools in Hong Kong. This ensures that children
studying in private schools have not been left out of the picture. Parents
of all students across the four selected schools were noti<U+FB01>ed and given
the opportunity to provide consent for participation. Upon obtaining
parental consent, school surveys were conducted across 9 school days
between November 2015 and June 2016 (Step 2). Primary school students, 
aged 5 to 12, were administered a questionnaire and also brought
home a separate questionnaire for their parents to <U+FB01>ll in. The detailed
rationale, selection and administration procedure for the school questionnaire 
surveys can be found elsewhere and are not repeated here (see
Leung and Loo, 2017). This study uses the parent questionnaires with
valid data for the variables of interest (N = 585), as explained in
Section 1, namely place of residence (to calculate network distance)
and socio-demographic variables of the child and his/her household
(age and gender and number of children, domestic helpers and cars in
the household).
To complement the school survey, Step 3 involved the collection of
available secondary data of the neighbourhood environment, collected
from a variety of sources. Data from 2015 to 2016, when the primary
data were collected, were not available and hence data from the closest
year (i.e. 2018) were selected instead. None of the students’ residences
were in Hong Kong’s most recent new development areas (see Task
Force on Land Supply, 2018). Students primarily resided in urban and
established new town areas of Hong Kong, where the neighbourhood
facilities and streetscapes are settled and without major developments
in terms of new transit stops or new leisure facilities. Di<U+FB00>erences in the
neighbourhood environment between 2015 to 2016 and 2018, if any,
would be negligible. From the Lands Department (2018) of the Hong
Kong SAR Government, sport and leisure facility locations and public
transit data, including bus routes and locations of bus stops and tram
stops, were collected. Road network and land use type data were ex-
tracted from OpenStreetMap (2018). Government data are a reliable
and authoritative source, and open source data are also quickly becoming 
increasingly accessible and popular in transportation studies
around the world, either as the primary data resource or to complement
other sources of data (e.g. Boeing, 2018; also see discussion in de Kadt
et al., 2014). Also, metro station entrance/ exit locations were obtained
from location maps produced by the metro operator (MTR, 2018). The
wealth of data in this study provides a high level of detail not easily
available in other study locations.

2.2. Methods of analysis

Moving onto the fourth step, these data were downloaded in their
respective point, line and polygon formats. Using information about the
child participants’ residences, as provided in the parent questionnaires,
XY coordinates were obtained, and network distance from school was
calculated as a travel characteristics variable. After loading these data
onto ESRI ArcMap 10.5, 500-metre bu<U+FB00>ers were created around each
residence point, indicative of a distance reachable within a ten-minute
walk, to represent the children’s surrounding neighbourhood area (Loo
and du Verle, 2017; Loo et al., 2017a). Bu<U+FB00>er analysis was conducted to
enumerate the sum of points, length of lines and percentage of polygons
within the neighbourhood areas and overlaid on the Hong Kong base
map to represent the neighbourhood environment characteristics
around children’s residences. To measure street connectivity within the
neighbourhood, further transformation was required on the road network 
data. Street block size, as a measure of street interconnectivity,
was generated in accordance with the block section measurement
method suggested by Stangl (2015). Firstly, a 5-metre bu<U+FB00>er was

created around each road centreline, to approximate the area covered
by a standard two-lane road and pavement as a road area polygon, in
accordance with the Hong Kong Planning Standards and Guidelines
(Planning Department, 2018) (motorways and trunk roads are not part
of the walkable street network and were not considered in the analysis).
Next, the area covered by the road polygon was erased from the Hong
Kong base map, and each individual parcel of land that remained, enclosed 
by streets on all sides, was considered as a street block. Block
section length, de<U+FB01>ned as the “maximum distance between any two
points on the perimeter of a block” (Stangl, 2015, p. 4) was generated
for all street blocks. The median block section length was calculated for
all street blocks partially or fully within each child neighbourhood,
serving as the street block size indicator in this study. The median was
used to prevent irregularly large street blocks from skewing the street
block size indicator away from a truthful representation of the reality
on the ground.
In Step 5, to understand the children’s socio-demographic characteristics 
and neighbourhood environment in which they lived, descriptive 
statistics were generated. Next, binary logistic regression
modelling was conducted on IBM SPSS Statistics 25 to better understand 
the factors associated with AST, using a binary dependent variable 
of whether the child’s journey to school was undertaken by active
transport (i.e. walking or cycling) or not, with the independent variables 
including 1) network distance from school, 2) neighbourhood
environment characteristics and 3) personal and household socio-demographic 
characteristics. For 1), the network distance was treated as a
continuous variable and not grouped. For 2), public transport facilities
were merged together into one single variable consisting the sum of
bus, tram and Light Rail stops and metro station entrances/ exits, to
serve as a composite measure of public transportation access in the
area. For the street connectivity indicator, block section length was
treated as a continuous variable. Block size-based measures have been
gaining in popularity in the literature in recent years (see Berrigan
et al., 2010), and smaller block sizes are indicative of more <U+FB01>ne-grained
and inter-connected neighbourhood streets (US Green Building Council,
2009). Sport and leisure facility data, also treated as a continuous
variable, were used to represent the recreational opportunities in the
neighbourhood area. The open and green space variable, measured as a
percentage of neighbourhood area, included only such areas that can
easily be accessed (i.e. OpenStreetMap land use data marked as ‘park’,
‘garden’ or ‘playground’, and excluding dense woodland, shrubbed
slopes, etc.) It is a comprehensive measure of the amount of open-air
recreational space where children can travel by, play and socialise in.
For 3), apart from age and number of cars in household, which were
modelled as continuous variables, the gender, domestic helper and
number of children measures were all dummy coded as binary variables, 
with reference values being ‘female’, ‘does not have a domestic
helper’ and ‘is not an only child’. These speci<U+FB01>cations are straightforward 
to interpret and understand. Better knowledge of the various
determinants of AST would be of considerable interest especially for
policymakers who intend to target active travel-friendly policies toward
di<U+FB00>erent groups of children of di<U+FB00>erent socio-demographic attributes
and in a variety of geographical contexts.
Finally, moving onto the case study in Step 6, the authors conducted
on-site <U+FB01>eld observations of the neighbourhood environment around
one school, chosen with reference to the <U+FB01>ndings from the binary logistic 
regression analysis. The purpose of this on-site examination was
to gain a deeper understanding of the variety of walking facilities and
recreational space provision within a typical Hong Kong school neighbourhood. 
Results were presented in the form of maps, descriptive
statistics and photographs of the area. This case study enables readers
to visualise the geographical distribution of children with AST and also
to recognise that neighbourhood environment attributes should be
comprehensively considered at a micro-scale as well, beyond the analysis 
of territory-wide data from government and other sources.

3. Findings and discussion

This section provides an overview of the child participants in the
study, including their travel behaviour to school, as well as their personal, 
household and neighbourhood environment characteristics. The
estimation results of the binary logistic regression model in establishing
the determinants of children’s AST are also described and discussed in
detail.

3.1. Descriptive statistics

Descriptive statistics of the child participants are shown in Table 2,
with respect to their personal, household, travel to school and neighbourhood 
environment characteristics. The child participants had a
mean age of 8.7 years, and 59% were boys. 41% had one or more domestic 
helper at home, 28% were the only child in the household and
30% of the children came from car-available households. Hong Kong’s
general population studying in primary schools had a mean age of
8.1 years and was 52% male (Education Bureau, 2016). For households
in Hong Kong with children, 30–44% employ a domestic helper
(Legislative Council Secretariat, 2017) and 63% are single-child
households (Census and Statistics Department, 2018). Private vehicles
were available for 15–28% of three-, four- and <U+FB01>ve-person households
(here inclusive of childless households in the absence of a more sophisticated 
classi<U+FB01>cation for this indicator) (Transport Department,
2014). While there seems to be an overrepresentation of children with
siblings in the study data, which may be attributed to siblings attending
the same school (Hui, 2015), the sample of child participants in this
study is a satisfactory representation of the whole population of

primary school students in Hong Kong. The mean travel time for the
journey to school was around 20 min with a network distance of
4.6 km. 10% went to school independently (i.e. without adult accompaniment), 
and 37% travelled actively to school. These <U+FB01>gures serve as
an important reference of the characteristics representative of the
children in this study. In particular, the <U+FB01>gures for travel to school are
considerably lower than the 29% (independent travel) and 51% (active
travel) recorded in Lam and Loo (2014). This is a clear indication of an
apparent decrease in children’s independent and active mobility, in line
with similar declining trends around the world (Shaw et al., 2013; Fyhri
and Hjorthol, 2009).

Regarding children’s neighbourhoods in the study, there were a
mean of 47 bus routes, 22 bus stops, 4 metro exits and 3 tram stops. The
street connectivity indicator, represented by street block size, had a
mean of 219 m. Sport and leisure facilities averaged at 5, while open
and green space percentage stood at around 6%. These <U+FB01>gures provide
useful context to understand what residential environments are typical
of Hong Kong. In this part of the world, high-rise, high-density and
high-intensity developments are common and increasingly more so,
with open and green space at a premium (Chiu, 2007; Lau et al., 2005;
Barter, 2012).

3.2. Travel characteristics to school

Child participants’ travel characteristics to school are shown in
Table 3. All active travellers (37%) travelled to school on foot, and none
by bicycle. In Hong Kong, cycling is still mainly for recreation, and is
not seen as a viable option for commuting to and from work and school
(Loo et al., 2019; Loo and Tsui, 2010). Safety concerns and topographical 
realities are the main barriers preventing cycling as a travel
mode for children and adults alike to become more popular, as are the
lack of safety-in-number bene<U+FB01>ts that are common in European countries 
such as Denmark or the Netherlands (Yao and Loo, 2016). The next
largest proportion of travel modes was school bus at 35%, followed by
rail (including metro and tram) at 10% and other public transport at
9%. Those who travelled to school by private car or taxi accounted for
around 8% of the sample. From Table 3, the percentage share of
walking and public transport was higher for boys and older children
than girls and younger children. The reverse was true for school bus and
other private transportation. These descriptions are in line with societal
norms that appear to be more protective of and place more restrictions
on mobility upon girls and younger children than boys and older children 
(Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Leung et al., 2019).

3.3. Binary logistic regression modelling

A binary logistic regression model was constructed to understand
the predictors of children’s AST, shown in Table 4, with three groups of
variables entered, namely 1) network distance from school, 2) neighbourhood 
environment characteristics and 3) personal and household
socio-demographic characteristics. Network distance from school was

entered <U+FB01>rst. Next, the variables consisting the neighbourhood environment 
characteristics were entered, namely public transit facilities,            
street block size, sport and leisure locations and percentage of open and            
green space. Finally, personal and household socio-demographic characteristics 
were entered, consisting of age, gender, single child in                 
household, presence of helper in household and number of cars in                     
household.                                                                           
The results of the <U+FB01>nal model showed the network distance variable              
to be highly signi<U+FB01>cant and negatively associated with AST at the                    
p < 0.001 level, with every kilometre increase in network distance                        
from school associated with a 67.1% reduction in likelihood of children              
travelling actively. For larger distances, especially residences in excess           
of 2 km away from school, walking becomes an increasingly unrealistic                
option, and this is congruent with the current literature (Panter et al.,            
2008; Dalton et al., 2011; Larsen et al., 2009; Lubans et al., 2011).                
For neighbourhood environment variables, there was a highly signi<U+FB01>cant 
positive association between the presence of public transit facilities
with AST at the p < 0.001 level. Each unit increase in public               
transit facilities was associated with a 4.2% increase in likelihood of              
active travel to school for children. This <U+FB01>nding is in line with most               
studies in the literature (see Wang and Wen, 2017), which indicate that              
areas with good access to public transportation are compact, urban and               
highly amenable for active travel behaviour as well, in contrast to                  
poorly connected and car-oriented suburban or rural areas. With that                 
being said, some studies have also shown there to be an association                  
between better perceived public transport access with more active                    
travel behaviour (e.g. Timperio et al., 2004; Handy et al., 2006). In                
other words, neighbourhoods may not necessarily need to have a great                      
quantity of public transit facilities to be seen to have ‘good’ public               
transport. Future research may move beyond quantity and further                      
consider the quality and convenience of access to public transit, and                
their relationship with sustainable travel modes.                                    
To represent neighbourhood street connectivity, the street block                
size indicator was signi<U+FB01>cant and negatively associated with AST at the              
p < 0.05 level, indicative of a 0.3% reduction in likelihood of travelling 
actively to school with every metre increase in block section                
length. Larger street block sizes are often accompanied by wider roads               
and larger tra<U+FB03>c volumes (Tao et al., 2010), which means it would be                 
more di<U+FB03>cult for children to explore their neighbourhood and community 
by walking to and from school. The neighbourhood would be                     
less walkable as a whole, with fewer route choices. This <U+FB01>nding is in                
agreement with past literature investigating street connectivity with                
respect to children’s AST (e.g. Dalton et al., 2011; Kerr et al., 2006), and         
has also been echoed in studies about work commutes and other trips                  
(e.g. Fan et al., 2014, 2017).                                                       
Sport and leisure facilities were also positively associated with AST           
and highly signi<U+FB01>cant to p < 0.001, with an increase of 36.3% in                     
likelihood of children to travel actively with a unit increase in the                

number of facilities. This means that children can easily visit these play
areas on the way to and from school, illustrating the importance of
having these places and facilities that enable children to have fun and
socialise with their friends. This <U+FB01>nding echoes that of Timperio et al.
(2004), which reported an association between parental perceptions of
limited sporting venues in neighbourhoods with reduced AST, and
Panter et al. (2008), which <U+FB01>nds that children are more likely to travel
actively to destinations if there are recreational facilities for them to
visit and play in along the way.
Percentage of open and green space was negatively associated with
AST, signi<U+FB01>cant to p < 0.01, indicative of a 14.3% reduction in likelihood 
of active travel with every percentage increase of open and green
space. This result must be interpreted with care, as there are reasonable
contextual explanations for this seemingly unexpected result. One
consideration is that the presence of open and green spaces (e.g. large
parks) may in some situations be an impediment to active travel, particularly 
in commutes (Wang and Wen, 2017; Fan et al., 2014; Fan
et al., 2017). Indeed, a recent Finnish study revealed that an increased
proportion of open and green space was associated with a lower likelihood 
of active travel to work (Mäki-Opas et al., 2016). Perhaps better
access to green spaces like urban parks only encourages physical activity 
heading to and from, and within, these spaces, rather than in
commutes. Future studies that comprehensively consider physical activity 
purposes including AST and beyond, such as travel to other activities, 
doing sports, etc., would be well-positioned to further investigate 
the relationship of active travel behaviour with open and
green spaces.
Regarding personal and household socio-demographic characteristics, 
older children were more likely to be walkers to school, signi<U+FB01>cant 
to the p < 0.05 level, indicative of a 16.9% increase in likelihood 
of children travelling actively to school for every unit increase in
age (in years). This is in line with discussions in Rothman et al. (2017).
As children grow older, they become more mature and are more capable 
to navigate their way on foot compared with younger children.
Households with domestic helpers were negatively associated with
children’s AST, signi<U+FB01>cant to the p < 0.05 level, and the likelihood of
children in these households to be active travellers to school was 43.8%
less than households with no domestic helpers. Employment of a domestic 
helper can be seen as a proxy measure for household income,
since only families that are wealthier and of a higher socioeconomic
status can a<U+FB00>ord a domestic helper. These <U+FB01>ndings are in line with
research that shows an inverse relationship between family-level so-
cioeconomic status (inclusive of household income measures) and the
likelihood of active travel to school (Chillón et al., 2009; Carlin et al.,
1997). Drilling deeper into the issue, the negative relationship between
domestic helper employment and children’s AST appears to be a re<U+FB02>ection 
of the culture of supervision and protectiveness in Hong Kong,
especially among wealthier households. Working-class families are

often struggling to make ends meet and cannot a<U+FB00>ord a domestic
helper. Having their child(ren) walk to school (with or without adult
supervision) would be the most straightforward and inexpensive option. 
More well-o<U+FB00> families, on the other hand, can a<U+FB00>ord a domestic
helper. The domestic helper would be expected to escort the child on
journeys that children are perceived to be unable to make alone, even
relatively short journeys to school (Lam and Loo, 2014; Karsten, 2014).
These journeys would more conveniently be undertaken by motorised
travel (e.g. by bus, school bus or metro), which is quicker than walking
and would allow the domestic helper more time to complete other errands. 
In Hong Kong and increasingly in other Asian societies, it is
common for middle-class families to employ domestic helpers to take
care of children as a result of more and more households becoming
dual-earner ones (The Hong Kong Council of Social Service, 2013).
Future research should continue to address the e<U+FB00>ect of having a domestic 
helper, as well as interactions between di<U+FB00>erent members of the
household, on children’s active and independent mobility for school
travel and beyond.
Child gender was not signi<U+FB01>cant to the p < 0.05 threshold, and
neither were single-child households nor the number of cars in the
household. This was unexpected, given common associations between
gender (McMillan et al., 2006) and car ownership (Panter et al., 2008)
with AST. The more signi<U+FB01>cant explanations of variance by network
distance from school and neighbourhood environment characteristics
together may mean that the personal and household socio-demographic
variables, while requiring attention, are relatively less important. The
Nagelkerke R-squared value was 0.623, which indicates that 62.3% of
the variance in the <U+FB01>nal model can be attributed to network distance,
neighbourhood environment characteristics and personal and household 
socio-demographic characteristics variables together.

4. Case study of one selected school

With reference to the binary logistic regression model result that
shorter distances are associated with more walking to school, one
school in Kwun Tong District was selected for a detailed on-site <U+FB01>eld
observation and qualitative examination of the surrounding environment. 
Children at this school had relatively lower travel distance and
duration to school in comparison with the other three schools surveyed,
and serves as a prime example of a neighbourhood school (see Bosetti,
2004), where the school is situated within the neighbourhood of a
majority of the children’s residences.
Two maps have been produced in Figs. 1a and b, which illustrate
children’s residential locations (N = 152) relative to their school location, 
the neighbourhood environment and also the distribution of
children who do and do not walk to school. As seen from Fig. 1a, the
children live relatively close to the school with those living outside and
inside the neighbourhood of the school being a roughly half-half split
(52% outside vs 48% inside). In Fig. 1b, the vast majority of children
walking to school resided within the school neighbourhood, in government-sponsored 
housing estates, with residential locations of children 
not walking to school removed for better visualisation in the map.
The most direct routes would typically be 10–15 min walks, via 1–2
road crossings and primarily along roadside pavements. From Table 5,
more than two thirds of children at the selected school did not walk to
school, and of those who did, a larger percentage were male and of
older age, in line with the previous discussion about age, gender and
AST in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. Fig. 2a–f are photographs of some walking
facilities in the area surrounding the selected school. Apart from facilities 
more typically associated with walking, like pavements and signalised 
road crossings, which can be accounted for by the street block
size indicator in this study, there are also footbridges, escalators,
housing estate podiums, covered walkways and indoor walkways in the
area. These facilities are beyond traditional street connectivity measures, 
necessitating a further assessment of the neighbourhood environment 
and walking facilities at a micro-scale. Their importance as

part of the pedestrian network are discussed in detail in the following
paragraphs.
With over 8000 m in road distance within the selected school’s
neighbourhood area, roadside pavements and at-grade signalised/ non-signalised 
crossings that traverse these roads are a common sight here,
and also an important part of every school journey. The majority of the
pavements in the neighbourhood area are 3 to 4 m wide, in line with
the Hong Kong Planning Standards and Guidelines (Planning Department,
2018), which notes that footpaths need to be a minimum of 2 m in
width to cater for basic pedestrian access and <U+FB02>ow, and preferably at
least 3.5 m wide for those that provide access to residential areas.
Fig. 2a shows a pavement in the case study area. Typically, pavements
in the area are situated between the road on one side and a concrete
wall or slope (which may be greened) on the other. In this particular
location, the pavement is partially covered overhead by an overhanging
building façade and mostly in the shade. It appears to be a rather
claustrophobic environment, being situated adjacent to a high-walled
car park and its 30- to 40-storey residential block complex above. In the
case study area, pavements serve as access passageways and locations
for public transit stops, with little street furniture, barring tra<U+FB03>c barriers 
and road signs. These routes, with a lack of shops, seating area or
greenery and accompanied by a large street block, are rather undesirable 
for pedestrians (Giles-Corti et al., 2009; Loo and Lam, 2012),
especially for children, who usually prefer there to be more natural
elements and/ or retail facilities in <U+FB01>ner-grained areas for them to enjoy
walking to and from school (Romero, 2015).
Footbridges and escalators are important components of the elevated 
pedestrian network in the study area, as connectors between
destinations separated by elevation di<U+FB00>erences, busy roads, or both
(Tan and Xue, 2014; Lau et al., 2005). Fig. 2b shows a footbridge,
arching over a main road, that connects a housing estate with the main
shopping centre in the study area. This particular footbridge is outdoors
and high-ceilinged, enabling natural light and wind to easily reach
pedestrians using it. It is also well-equipped with ceiling lighting for
pedestrians moving about in the evening and also has tactile strips for
the blind. There are also indoor and air-conditioned footbridges connecting 
between other shopping centres and housing estates in the area.
Footbridges provide safe ways to cross main roads especially for travel-disadvantaged 
groups like children, disabled people and the elderly
(Loo and Lam, 2012). Fig. 2c shows a system of escalators connecting
the ground level near the metro station to a housing estate, podium and
shopping centre that are on higher elevation. Pedestrians are able to
move between destinations more easily, and for children attending this
school who need to use or pass by the metro station, escalator connections 
provide the option of making the journey by walking, instead
of taking a connecting bus or minibus to reach the school. While the
escalator systems in this district are more piecemeal and on a smaller
scale compared to the well-known Central to Mid-Levels escalator and
walkway system at the heart of Hong Kong’s central business district
(CBD), escalator connectors can help to reduce transport costs for both
the user and the authorities (Zacharias, 2011). As long as they are used
safely, escalators provide an e<U+FB03>cient and comfortable alternative for
short-distance travel between locations that di<U+FB00>er in elevation without
needing to use a stairway or motorised transportation.
Finally, the case study area also has a multitude of elevated estate
podiums with open areas, covered walkways and seating on the side, as
well as shopping centres that, in e<U+FB00>ect, are also providers of indoor
passageways connecting di<U+FB00>erent destinations, as shown in Fig. 2d, e
and f respectively. These communal spaces are places where children
can play, socialise and explore their own neighbourhood (Valentine,
1997b), with a variety of destinations like shops, playgrounds, leisure
facilities and podium gardens on the way to and from school. The
elevated estate podiums in the case study area also serve as connectors
between di<U+FB00>erent housing blocks, and pedestrians who are in a hurry or
only need to pass through the area can easily use the covered walkways
on the podium, providing shelter against the elements. Shopping
		
centres can be understood as another form of communal space in the										
case study area, providing retail and entertainment opportunities for										
children and their parents alike. The indoor passageways of shopping											
centres, like the one shown in Fig. 2f, are also important parts of the											
pedestrian network that must not be neglected, because they also
											
connect between housing estates, the metro station and the public
transport interchange, and in e<U+FB00>ect are also pedestrian links (Lau et al.,
2005). The important caveat, of course, is that these privately-owned
communal spaces need to be properly managed and still provide for the
social needs of local people in the area – children, adults and the elderly
alike (Luk, 2009; Tan and Xue, 2014) – for the neighbourhood environment 
to be desirable and convenient.

5. Conclusion and recommendations

This study has provided a timely overview of children’s AST in Hong
Kong and its associated factors through descriptive statistics and binary
logistic regression modelling. The rate of AST in Hong Kong at 37%, as
revealed by this study, is considerably lower than in other East Asian
contexts, such as Beijing (60–70%) and the urban areas of Japan (nearly
100%) (Li and Zhao, 2015; Zhang et al., 2017; Mori et al., 2012). There
are many context-dependent reasons setting Hong Kong apart that may

help to explain these di<U+FB00>erences. Hilly topography makes active travel,
especially cycling, less amenable (Loo et al., 2019). In contrast, Beijing’s 
<U+FB02>at topography seems to be one reason why a substantial proportion 
of students are able to cycle to school. Furthermore, policy
factors also come into play. Japan’s extensive public education policy
that comes with strong encouragement of walk-to-school practices
(Mori et al., 2012) di<U+FB00>ers quite signi<U+FB01>cantly with Hong Kong’s policy of
developing a strong private school sector (Choi, 2005). This appears to
be an important contributor to the further travel distances in Hong
Kong as a whole, which leads to active travel being less feasible when
compared with other East Asian societies. Clearly, even within the East
Asian context, there are many di<U+FB00>erences despite cities being similarly
high-density, compact and busy in tra<U+FB03>c. Future studies may consider
cross-city and cross-regional comparisons that would help researchers
to further understand how location-speci<U+FB01>c factors – including but not
limited to neighbourhood environment, topography, local policy, etc. –
may in<U+FB02>uence AST rates and whether lessons can be learnt from the
di<U+FB00>erences between locations.
This study also visualised a typical school neighbourhood area and
its environmental attributes through maps and a presentation of on-site
<U+FB01>eld observations. In the case study neighbourhood area, despite the
roadside pedestrian environment being rather perfunctory and nondescript, 
and some street blocks being relatively large, other pedestrian
facilities (many of them elevated) have compensated for this de<U+FB01>ciency
and enabled pedestrian networks to stay interconnected, which illustrates 
the importance of micro-scale considerations of pedestrian network 
connectivity. This study exempli<U+FB01>es the advantages of using both
quantitative and qualitative methods to conduct research. Future studies 
may further consider children’s and their parents’ perceptions of
the neighbourhood environment, stranger danger, road safety and their
(children’s) own abilities in navigating the road environment and daily
activities. Academics should also begin to pay more attention to the
di<U+FB00>erent types of open and green spaces aside of parks, gardens and
playgrounds, and how they in<U+FB02>uence travel behaviour. For example,
there are spaces that are privately owned and/ or have not been
properly documented, such as estate podiums, rooftop gardens, indoor/
covered areas within shopping centres, and these may have important
in<U+FB02>uences on whether active travel occurs (Valentine, 1997b; Lau et al.,
2005). Research into these aspects of children’s mobility and road
safety would be highly useful for researchers and policymakers in East
Asia and beyond to develop and implement policies that can improve
rates of active travel.
There is an opportunity for the education authorities to better allocate 
children to schools that are closer to their residences, as shorter
route distances make active travel far more likely. In many cities,
children’s residence locations are taken into account when public
schools are allocated to them as they prepare to enter primary school,
and a similar policy exists in Hong Kong (Loo and Lam, 2015). However, 
parents may also have numerous other rationales and considerations 
when selecting a ‘good’ primary school for their child, especially
those who can a<U+FB00>ord to educate their children in private schools, such
as school reputation, teaching quality, smaller class size, etc., and the
so-called ‘good’ schools may not always be within their neighbourhood
of residence (Bosetti, 2004). To resolve this, there would need to be
further incentives for parents to select schools in closer proximity, such
as improvement in the quality of teaching and school reputation at
neighbourhood schools at the longer term, given the trade-o<U+FB00> in school
choice observed between academic quality and distance to school
(Burgess et al., 2015). At this juncture, the deliberate decision to move
to certain neighbourhoods with better schools and better neighbourhood 
quality, i.e. residential self-selection, also needs to be mentioned.
Although residential self-selection has not been considered in this
study’s model, future researchers may need to consider parental attitudinal 
factors relevant to residence location, especially to do with
lifestyle choices (e.g. preference of a greener and more active lifestyle)
and the choices they make for their children (e.g. enrolment into a

school with better reputation) (Ettema and Nieuwenhuis, 2017; Leung
et al., 2019). Ultimately, the key message is that attending a neighbourhood 
school has the advantage of most necessities being nearby,
and young children would not need to travel too far to go to school,
attend extra-curricular activities and to play with their friends (Leung
et al., 2019). Active travel, as a result, becomes much more amenable.
Policymakers should also consider improvements to the neighbourhood 
environment and move toward compact, mixed-use and pedestrian-friendly 
designs that have a variety of destinations for residents 
to go to, which has been shown to increase walking behaviour
(Giles-Corti et al., 2009; Loo et al., 2017b). The association between
AST and more sport and leisure venues and public transit facilities
shows that the provision of greater activity opportunities and destinations 
is related with increased physical activity in children, whether
with more active travel, increased sport activities or both (Leung et al.,
2019). On a related note, given the understandably protective mindset
of parents, policymakers may also consider working with schools to
make provisions for implementing programmes that encourage walking
to and from school (Walking School Bus, 2018; Lee et al., 2017), as an
alternative option for short journeys that are currently undertaken via
public transportation or operated by school bus services. Parents would
be aware that their children are being safely supervised home or to their
after-school activities, while the children are able to obtain the physical
activity that they need for healthy physical development.
In conclusion, this study has provided a quantitative and qualitative
examination of AST and its associated factors of the neighbourhood
environment and socio-demographic attributes for Hong Kong children.
Future research should focus on investigating children’s and parents’
perceptions on the neighbourhood environment, concerns for safety,
lifestyle decisions and personal capabilities. Researchers should also
look beyond streets alone to examine the e<U+FB00>ects of the whole pedestrian
network (elevated, at-grade and underground) on travel behaviour, in a
world where cities are becoming increasingly vertically oriented and
developing not only laterally, but also upwards and downwards. This
needs to be accompanied by the appropriate changes in education
policy and improvements in the neighbourhood environment, making
use of lessons to be learnt from future cross-city and cross-regional
comparison studies, in order for children to be able to walk on their
journeys to and from school safely and happily.