An environment-people interactions framework for analysing children's                                                                                            T
extra-curricular activities and active transport

In this paper, the focus is on examining children's extra-curricular activities in a high density urban East Asian
environment, specifically Hong Kong. The paper offers a framework to understand children's extra-curricular
activities time allocation and active travel participation. Three variables of interest are considered: residential
location choice (based on residential density), weekly time spent in four different types of out-of-home after-
school activities (academic, sports, arts, and other), and level of active travel. The proposed model takes into
account common observed and unobserved effects that can be affecting the three outcomes simultaneously.
Overall, the findings, based on survey data collected at four primary schools between November 2015 and June
2016 in Hong Kong, show that children's activity and travel behaviour within the same city can differ quite
substantially based on neighbourhood environment (notably residential density) and family socio-demographic
background. The empirical findings and analysis provide insights for policy development, including those related
to (a) targeting children's extra-curricular activity participation for underprivileged groups, (b) promoting work-
friendly policies that enable parents to spend more time and participate in more activities together with their
children, as well as (c) promoting mixed use and compact development to encourage a more active lifestyle for
children and parents alike.

1. Introduction                                                                                    
												
Academic interest in children's mobility with respect to their ac-                            
cessibility to opportunities across different locational and situational                           
contexts has grown quickly over the last decade. This trend has been                               
reflected in the number of manuscripts published in leading transport                              
journals like the Journal of Transport Geography. In the last ten years                                 
(2009–2018), this journal has published 23 articles directly related to                            
children travels from across the world, including empirical studies in                             
Albania (Pojani and Boussauw, 2014), Austria (Stark et al., 2018a;                                 
Stark et al., 2018b), Belgium (Zwerts et al., 2010), Canada (Fusco et al.,                         
2012; Waygood et al., 2017), China (Li and Zhao, 2015; Zhang et al.,                               
2017), Finland (Kytta et al., 2015), Germany (Stark et al., 2018a),                                
Japan (Susilo and Waygood, 2012; Waygood et al., 2017), New Zealand                                
(Lang et al., 2011), Norway (Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009), Portugal (Lopes                            
et al., 2014), Sweden (Andersson et al., 2012; Waygood et al., 2017;                              

Westman et al., 2013), and the US (McDonald, 2012; Deka, 2013,
2017), as well as other more issue-specific studies (Christie et al., 2011;
Ghekiere et al., 2018; Sharmin and Kamruzzaman, 2017; Tranter and
Sharpe, 2012). Nonetheless, with 1199 papers published in the journal
during the same period, it is clear that various geographical issues of
children travels are still barely unravelled.
In this paper, we emphasize the need for a holistic approach to study
children's activity-travel patterns by recognizing that a child's activity-
travel patterns are heavily influenced and constrained not only by in-
dividual factors (such as gender and age), but also by the characteristics
of their parents/family and neighbourhood attributes (Loo and Lam,
2015; Lam and Loo, 2014). The role of parent(s) or guardian(s) as de-
cision-makers (on behalf of the children) is obvious, but other parental
influences through lifestyles cannot be ignored. For example, McDonald
(2008) found that a mother's lifestyle choice of commuting to work
using a private vehicle had a negative impact on her children's pro-

pensity to walk or bicycle to school. Deka (2013) also found evidence
that the lifestyle choice of household adults' travel mode to work has a
strong influence on the travel mode used by children in the household.
Neighbourhood attributes also come into play, where evidence has
shown that certain mixed-use and pedestrian-friendly neighbourhoods,
such as those in well-planned satellite cities and new towns, are con-
ducive to more active and independent travel in children (Loo and Lam,
2015; Lam and Loo, 2014). Indeed, there have been thorough reviews
in the literature regarding direct and indirect environmental determi-
nants for children's active travel behaviour, indicating the importance
of a variety of neighbourhood-level factors such as travel distance, so-
cial cohesion measures, urban form, and en-route road safety, among
other factors, all of which are important to consider for their influence
on the activity-travel patterns of children (see, for example,
Kemperman and Timmermans, 2014; Panter et al., 2008).
Furthermore, children's school-going patterns can also have an im-
pact on the activity-travel patterns and commute mode choices of
household adults, as exemplified in the structure of many activity-based
models that use the school start and end time of children as time con-
straints for the parents' schedules, imposing not only an adjustment of
work start and end times, but also drop-off/pick-up obligations that
influence all the household members' commute mode choices (see Bhat
et al., 2004 and Bhat et al., 2013). However, the inter-linkage between
adults' and children's activity-travel patterns is not simply confined to
the work-related travel of adults and the school-related travel of chil-
dren. The majority of current evidence suggests that children to a large
extent still depend on household adults to drive or take them to extra-
curricular activity events outside the realm of children's school activ-
ities, especially those from households owning more vehicles in lower
density neighbourhoods (Copperman and Bhat, 2007; Paleti et al.,
2013; Hjorthol and Fyhri, 2009). Such serve-passenger activities con-
strain adults' activity-travel patterns in important ways. In addition to
serve-passenger activities, the activity-travel patterns of children and
adults get inter-linked in the context of joint activity participations in
extra-curricular activities. In other words, the importance of con-
sidering the geographical context of these inter-linkages between
adults' and children's activity-travel patterns must be recognized. In
many cities, public schools are allocated based on students' home lo-
cations (Loo and Lam, 2015). Attendance at a neighbourhood school,
whether public or private, will have the obvious benefit of reducing the
need for young children to travel too far and will also make it easier for
a parent (or guardian) to supervise a child between school and home,
and by extension, extra-curricular activities. Some parents may even
consider moving to so-called better neighbourhoods for a higher chance
of their children to be admitted to better schools and better surrounding
activity facilities and amenities (Lam and Loo, 2014; Loo and Lam,
2015). From the above, it should be apparent that both children's and
adults' activity-travel patterns ought to be considered together within
the geographical context of the built environment.
The strong inter-linkage just discussed between children's and
adult's activity-travel patterns is not adequately recognized in the lit-
erature, which has focused more on the intra-household interactions
solely among the adults in the household (see, for example, Zhang and
Fujiwara, 2009; Lim, 2015; Kim et al., 2015). The implicit assumption
in such an adult-centric activity-travel approach is that the activity
participation of children is primarily driven by the activity participation
needs/responsibilities of adults (such as a parent having to go to the
groceries, and her/his child tagging along for the grocery trip). And
even if a serve-passenger activity is for the express purpose of enabling
participation of a child in an activity, the implicit assumption is that it
is the adults who decide on their children's activity participations.
However, earlier studies in the child development field (Prinzie et al.,
2008; Tackett et al., 2012; Tomasello, 2014) indicate that children as
young as 5–6 years of age start developing their own identities and

individualities, and social needs, and then interact with their parents
and other adults to facilitate the fulfilment of these needs. This suggests
a child-centric activity-travel approach that considers the character-
istics of the child, while also using adult demographic and lifestyle
variables (among other variables) as determinant variables. Of course,
in reality, there is likely to be a combination of adult decision-driven
children activities as well as child decision-driven adult activities
leading up to the interactions between children and adult activity-travel
patterns. This suggests a hybrid strategy of the adult-centric and child-
centric approaches. While we leave the development of such a hybrid
strategy for future efforts, in this paper, we focus on a more child-
centric strategy as a means to shed more light on children-adult lin-
kages.

1.1. Children's extra-curricular activity participation, use of active-transport
modes, and the geographical context

As already discussed earlier, much literature regarding children's
activity-travel patterns has focused on school activity-travel, and there
is indeed a relatively good understanding in the literature of how
children travel to school in a variety of geographical contexts, including
but not limited to urban, rural, high density, low density, inner city,
urban sprawl, etc. (see, for example, among many others, Andersson
et al., 2012; Fusco et al., 2012; Lang et al., 2011; Li and Zhao, 2015;
Pojani and Boussauw, 2014; Rothman et al., 2018; Stark et al., 2018b;
Zhang et al., 2017). However, studies on children's non-school activity-
travel patterns have primarily been confined to the Western Hemi-
sphere and generally in lower density urban environments where
children are mostly dependent on automobiles for non-school activities
(see, for example, Copperman and Bhat, 2007; Sener and Bhat, 2007;
Paleti et al., 2011; Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Hjorthol and Fyhri, 2009;
Stark et al., 2018a). Therefore, to fill this gap in research, the focus of
this study lays upon children's non-school activity-travel patterns in a
high density urban environment. Specifically, we focus on children's
out-of-home (OH) activity participation beyond the usual school hours
(henceforth, we will refer to such beyond-school time OH activities as
“extra-curricular” activities) within the geographic locale of Hong
Kong, where its compact and highly dense urban form means that
distances are much more amenable to the active travel modes of
walking and cycling. At this junction, there are several important ob-
servations relating to childhood and children growing up in Hong Kong
that ought to be considered, in relation to children's activities and travel
behaviour, as summarized from Karsten (2014) and Loo and Lam
(2015):

1) Hong Kong children are primarily raised in high-rise apartment
buildings in compact residential neighbourhoods.
2) While there is a limited amount of public space, there are some
playgrounds and recreational locations in urban areas for children to
play in, although they are relatively standard in design and provi-
sions like swings and slides.
3) Children as young as 2 years old start going to “school”, and parents
enrol their children into these playgroups and kindergartens early in
order to get a head start in entering better primary schools.
4) Like many developed economies, Hong Kong is an ageing society
and birth rates are low, but this does not seem to have restricted the
competition for entering into the best schools by having the best
“CV” of extra-curricular activities.

It is important to consider the above context when looking at chil-
dren's activity-travel behaviour in Hong Kong. Children's participation
in scheduled after-school extra-curricular activities are by far the norm
rather than the exception in this part of the world (Karsten, 2014),
although such scheduled activities are also gaining traction in the

Western Hemisphere as well (Wheeler and Green, 2018; Molinuevo
et al., 2010). Clearly, from a travel modelling perspective, a better
understanding of children's extra-curricular activity participation
(ECAP) can provide key insights into the downstream modelling of
travel demand patterns of both children and adults. Furthermore, from
a geographical perspective, the understanding of children's extra-cur-
ricular activities and related travel with respect to the neighbourhood
environment will be helpful to inform policy in the planning and
maintaining of communities that are compact, walkable and have a
variety of destinations and activity venues for children and adults to
frequent.
An important activity-travel dimension to the ECAPs of children,
then, is the means by which children travel to these participations,
especially in places such as Hong Kong where children have more op-
tions to use active travel modes. Being able to safely walk or cycle to
activity locations allows children to experience individual mobility and
gain a certain degree of independence that may facilitate additional
ECAP. At the same time, since active transport involves non-motorized

modes, it can significantly reduce various negative transport ex-
ternalities (notably traffic congestion, carbon emissions and particulate
matter emissions, and traffic fatalities) because of the reduced need for
parents to drive their children (Loo and Banister, 2016; Loo and Tsoi,
2018). Further, a good understanding of what facilitates or reduces the
use of active travel modes in childhood does not only help promote the
use of such modes during childhood, but also potentially reduces motorized 
travel demand in the future because the use of active travel
modes as a child translates into a higher likelihood of walking and bi-
cycling even in adulthood (Yang et al., 2014; Craigie et al., 2011). More
broadly, engagement in extra-curricular activities and active transport
can shape a child's future behaviour as a traveller (and as a citizen in
general). Also, due to the discretionary nature of extra-curricular ac-
tivities, and the intrinsic physical energy/capability of the youth po-
pulation, it is natural to jointly examine children's extra-curricular ac-
tivity participation (ECAP) and active travel (ACT) choices. In this
regard, although there have been some models that have analysed
children's ECAP (Reisner, 2003; Sener et al., 2008; Paleti et al., 2011)
and some others have studied children's ACT choices (Roth et al., 2012;
Kemperman and Timmermans, 2014), there has been no earlier attempt
that we are aware of to develop a joint model of the inter-relationship
between ECAP and ACT choices within the context of the relevant
neighbourhood environment. This is despite descriptive studies that
have indicated that, for example, participation in sports activities is
positively associated with the use of active travel modes (De Meester
et al., 2017), and the use of active travel modes is associated with
generally increased ECAP (Lehner-Lierz, 2003; Mapes, 2009).
This paper aims to demonstrate that this interaction of ECAP and
ACT is in fact closely intertwined with the built environment, and
should not be overlooked. Having a good mix and variety of destina-
tions in the neighbourhood environment has been shown to be im-
portant for promoting walking behaviour (Giles-Corti et al., 2009; Loo
et al., 2017). Furthermore, if there are activity venues nearby children's
homes, children are able to make these journeys on foot and there
would be no need for parents to provide transportation for children to
travel to these venues (Hoefer et al., 2001). If these extra-curricular
activity venues exist nearby and are within reach, it would be a rea-
sonable option for parents to send their children to participate in these
nearby extra-curricular activities. In other words, activity location and
by extension how children travel to these locations should not be seen
as merely a by-product of the extra-curricular activity choice, because
they are a highly important part of the package in activity selection
(Simpkins et al., 2013; Ivaniushina and Aleksandrov, 2015). From the

above, it should be clear that ECAP, ACT and the built environment
need to be investigated together in order to understand the geo-
graphical context of children's activity-travel behaviour, especially for
extra-curricular activities, which deserves more attention in the litera-
ture. This brings in a third endogenous variable in our analysis –

residential location (RL), as captured by the population density of the
tertiary planning unit neighbourhood of the child's residence.1,2 We
consider residential location as an endogenous variable to account for
the possibility that RL, along with ECAP and ACT, are determined as a
choice bundle, and to accommodate for any self-selection effects in the
influence of RL on ECAP and ACT. For example, households that em-
brace a “green” lifestyle, or that are generically predisposed to a dy-
namic cultural experience, may consciously choose to locate themselves
in high density neighbourhoods (because of the ability to access activity
locations within very close proximity). The children in these same
households will also then be more intrinsically pre-disposed than their
counterparts in less dense neighbourhoods to partake in, say, sports or
art or music activities as well as in active travel. If so, and if this en-
dogeneity in residential location choice is ignored, the result will be an
exaggeration of any positive effects of residential density on activity
participation in sports/arts/hobbies and active travel mode use.

1.2. A conceptual environment-people interactions framework

Theoretically, our study contributes more broadly to child devel-
opment considerations within a more holistic framework of children's
overall life-satisfaction and wellbeing. Our conceptual framework, as
shown in Fig. 1, builds upon and integrates the conceptual models
developed by Leung and Loo (2017) and Loo et al. (2017). It puts
children's self-worth, well-being, and overall life satisfaction explicitly
as the ultimate outcomes (shown by ovals toward the right in Fig. 1).
Following the multiscale environment geographical framework (Loo
et al., 2017), socio-demographic factors and environment-activity-
travel decisions are explicitly considered to investigate children's re-
sidential location (RL), extra-curricular activity participation (ECAP),
and active travel (ACT) behaviour. In the framework of Fig. 1, RL is part
of the “Built Environment” block, ECAP is part of the “Activity Parti-
cipation” block, and ACT is part of the “Travel Behaviour” block.
The conceptual framework posits that socio-demographic char-
acteristics (the left block of Fig. 1) impacts the environment-activity-
travel decisions (middle block of Fig. 1, comprising the inter-relation-
ships and joint choices among neighbourhood environment, activity
participation, and travel behaviour decisions), as well as the ultimate
child outcomes (right block of Fig. 1, associated with a child's self-
worth, wellbeing, and life satisfaction). As discussed in the above sec-
tions, the relationship between socio-demographic characteristics with
activity participation, travel behaviour, and neighbourhood environ-
ment has primarily been related to travel behaviour for school and its
on-site activities (e.g. Andersson et al., 2012; Li and Zhao, 2015; Pojani
and Boussauw, 2014; Rothman et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2017), so the
“Activity Participation” block also considers extra-curricular activities
(non-school and out-of-home) in this inter-relationship, in order to
build on the current growing literature in this area (e.g. Copperman and
Bhat, 2007; Paleti et al., 2011). The importance of the relationship
between socio-demographic characteristics with the ultimate child
outcomes, including self-worth, wellbeing and life satisfaction, has also

been clearly illustrated in recent literature (e.g. Bulanda and Majumdar,
2009; Castillo et al., 2011; Leung and Loo, 2017; Gómez et al., 2017),
which justifies the inter-linkage between the left block and the right
block in Fig. 1.
Further, the environment-activity-travel decisions (middle block of
Fig. 1) impact the child's outcomes (right block in Fig. 1), in terms of
their self-worth and well-being. By engaging in sports or art activities,
children can trust their mental and physical abilities, and become more
self-confident compared with those who are restricted to the regular
school curriculum (Gunduz et al., 2017; Kniffin et al., 2015). Similarly,
for example, by using active travel modes, children can experience an
enhanced sense of independence and accomplishment, and obtain a
sense of being able to discover the environment on their own (Kytta
et al., 2015; Leung and Loo, 2017).
Activity participation and travel behaviour clearly influence the
child's well-being. For example, studies in education and child devel-
opment suggest that ECAP may have life-long benefits for the child,
including a positive effect on the development of students' achievement
in core subjects (Schuepbach, 2015; Covay and Carbonaro, 2010). At
the same time, the packed schedules and any structured ECAP activities
also imply that there is less unstructured play time and “down-time” for
children (Karsten, 2014; Holloway and Pimlott-Wilson, 2014), which
can have detrimental effects on a child's well-being (Gray, 2011; Laird
et al., 2014). In terms of travel behaviour influences on well-being,
epidemiological research studies have now clearly established a link
between active travel and health outcomes. For example, the choice of
active travel modes correlates with reduced symptoms of anxiety and
depression, fewer physician visits, and reduced dependence on medi-
cations for chronic health conditions such as coronary heart disease,
stroke, and diabetes (see Saunders et al., 2013; Lubans et al., 2011;
Jarrett et al., 2012). Bicycling and walking, when incorporated into a

child's daily routine, increases the rates of caloric expenditure and re-
duces obesity. Indeed, it has been found that countries with higher rates
of walking and bicycling have lower obesity rates than countries that
have a higher level of car dependency, especially for children (Poitras
et al., 2016; Mitchell et al., 2017). For example, the obesity rate among
children is about 19% today in Hong Kong relative to about 33% in the
US (Lobstein et al., 2015). But, worldwide, obesity among children
continues to increase over time in most countries, including Hong Kong
and the US. The relationship between activity participation and travel
behaviour should be clear from the above discussion, which shows how
activity participation and travel behaviour can affect children's well-
being in both psychological and physical domains.
Finally, the conceptual framework in Fig. 1 shows the link between
a child's self-worth (SW) and a child's well-being (WB), and finally the
connection between a child's SW/WB and a child's overall life sa-
tisfaction (as represented by the vertical arrows in the “child outcomes”
block of Fig. 1), completing the conceptual framework. Self-worth,
wellbeing and life satisfaction are treated as they appear primarily
because considerations of perceptions of self (self-worth) and moods in
mobility-specific and activity-specific situations (wellbeing) are com-
ponents of life satisfaction, which justifies the one-way inter-linkage
between SW and WB, SW and life satisfaction, and WB and life sa-
tisfaction (see Schimmack et al., 2002). While the conceptual frame-
work being tested in this study (as marked by asterisks in Fig. 1) does
not include the variables in the “Child Outcomes” block, it remains
highly important to consider the implications of the interrelationships
between the other blocks in Fig. 1 and how these interrelationships may
affect a child's SW, WB and life satisfaction. While there has been some
recent work on this front (Leung and Loo, 2017; Ramanathan et al.,
2014; Romero, 2015), it evidently deserves far more attention.

1.3. Exogenous and endogenous variables

Within the context of the conceptual framework presented in the
previous section, the current paper considers the socio-demographic
characteristics of the child and her/his household as exogenous vari-
ables.
The endogenous variables correspond to a subset of choices from the
“Environment-Activity-Travel Decisions” block, corresponding to RL (as
characterized by residential density), ECAP, and ACT choices (marked
with an asterisk in Fig. 1). RL is characterized as a nominal variable in
our analysis and modelled using a multinomial probit (MNP) structure
with three alternatives: Low density (< 35,000 pers./sq. km), medium
density (35,000–70,000 pers./sq. km), and high density (> 70,000
pers./sq. km). These were the density qualifications selected, as they
are highly relevant especially in the Asian context where there are
many cities with large and still increasing population sizes, Hong Kong
being one of them, with highly compact and high-rise urban neigh-
bourhoods.
ECAP is characterized by the participation decision of children
(aged 5–12) over the course of a five-day Monday-to-Friday work week
in each of four extra-curricular activity types (i.e. multi-day data), as
well as the time allocated (in minutes) to those activity types with a
positive participation decision (weekend day data was not collected in
the data used in the current analysis, and extending the current em-
pirical investigation to include ECAP over the weekend days remains a
direction for future research). The four extra-curricular activity types
considered are academics (including learning new languages and at-
tending a tutorial school for math, science, or other subjects), sports
(tennis, rugby, gymnastics, taekwondo, and any other organized phy-
sical activity), arts (including piano, dance, recitation, singing, or-
chestra, and painting), and interests/hobbies (including non-physical
activities such as engaging in chess, lego, and magic play sessions, as
well as service/religious pursuits such as charity work, children’s uni-
formed groups such as boy/girl scouts, and church-related activities).3
For presentation ease, we will refer to the last extra-curricular activity
type simply as “hobbies” in the rest of this paper. In addition to the four
ECAP activities, we also consider an “in-home” activity type to which
all individuals assign a non-zero positive amount of time (including
such an “outside” activity type in the analysis allows the possibility that
some children do not partake in ECAP activities at all; for convenience,
we will refer to this variable with five alternatives, including the in-
home alternative, as ECAP, even though only the first four are the extra-
curricular OH activity type alternatives). Travel time to OH activities is
excluded from the time budget based on the activity-based travel de-
mand modelling perspective that individuals determine their activity
needs and time-use in activities, and then travel features during the step
of scheduling the activities to fulfil the desired activity agenda (see Bhat
et al., 2016, and Spissu et al., 2009, for other studies that use a similar
approach of focusing on activity time-use and excluding travel time).
The ECAP variable takes a multiple discrete-continuous (MDC) form
because individuals can participate in multiple alternatives (activity
types) within the same work week (e.g. 1 sport activity and 1 academic
activity), investing positive continuous amounts of time to each activity
type participated in (e.g. 3 h of soccer, 2 h of English tutorial school). To
construct the “time budget” of the MDC variable, we consider a typical
school schedule (roughly from 8:30 am to 3 pm in Hong Kong) in which
children have approximately six hours during each weekday to spend in
ECAP after school (the results were not very sensitive to alternative
lengths of seven and eight hours of total budget). Thus, the total time
budget over the course of the work week was constructed in our ana-
lysis as being equal to 30 h (=6 h per day*five days per week) minus

the travel times of each child.
The third endogenous variable, ACT, is represented as a three-ca-
tegory nominal variable that reflects the intensity (in terms of percen-
tage of total weekly travel time) of active travel (walking and bicy-
cling). From the survey data (to be discussed in the next section), we are
able to compute the total weekly travel time expended in ECAP and the
amount of this total travel time attributable to active travel. Then, those
who spend zero ECAP travel time in active travel are categorized under
the “no active travel” nominal category, while those who spend all their
ECAP travel time in active travel are categorized under the “all travel is
active travel” nominal category (for ease, we will refer to this category
as “all active travel”). The remaining children are grouped under the
“some active travel” nominal category. Using a three-category nominal
variable that describes total weekly active travel time for all activities
allows readers to conceptualize children's activity-travel behaviour
easier, as distinct categories, rather than having to consider the com-
plexities of different trip time and travel mode for different activity
types.
Our joint model takes the form of a multiple-discrete continuous
probit (MDCP) and multinomial probit (MNP) model system, in which
an MDCP component – corresponding to ECAP – and two MNP com-
ponents – corresponding to RL and ACT – are modelled together in a
multivariate framework. The model considers common observed effects
of individual and household factors on these three endogenous vari-
ables. For example, children from households with low income earnings
(an observed socio-demographic variable in our analysis) may be more
constrained to locate in neighbourhoods with high population density,
spend less time in ECAP, and also engage more in active transport. As
importantly, our joint model also considers and accommodates the ef-
fects of potential common unobserved individual-specific factors, such
as lifestyle factors, that may influence multiple endogenous variables
simultaneously. For instance, a family that is intrinsically dynamic with
an active lifestyle (an unobserved factor) may deliberately locate in
high density residential neighbourhoods that offer higher accessibility
to activity locations, encourage children to invest substantial time in
sports pursuits, as well as encourage the use of active travel modes.
Finally, after accommodating for common observed and unobserved
factors that necessitate the joint modelling of the three variables, our
model also allows recursive “causal” effects among the endogenous
variables. In joint choice situations where one or more of the en-
dogenous variables is a discrete nominal or an MDC variable or some
other limited-dependent variable, bi-directional causal effects are not
logically consistent, and a recursive decision structure needs to be
specified (Maddala, 1983). In our empirical analysis discussed later, we
tested alternative recursive structures, but the preferred one in terms of
goodness of fit was also intuitive in that the long-term decision (RL)
influences the medium-term decision (ACT), and both impact the short-
term ECAP decision. The reader will note that our model is, however, a
true joint model (and not a sequential system), because unobserved
correlations across the three variables (RL, ECAP, and ACT) are ex-
plicitly considered.

2. Analytic framework and data

The joint model used in the current paper takes nominal variables as
well as an MDC endogenous variable. It is specifically designed to
model the “Environment-Activity-Travel Decisions” that is the middle
block in Fig. 1, namely the joint choices of and interrelationships be-
tween residential location (nominal variable, represented by three po-
pulation density categories), travel behaviour (nominal variable, re-
presented by three active travel intensity categories), and extra-
curricular activity participation (multiple discrete-continuous variable,

represented by a discrete activity type and continuous time use in the
particular activity). The next section discusses the necessary technical
specifications of the model structure in detail.

2.1. Model structure

2.1.1. The nominal variables

Consider an individual facing a multi-dimensional array of nominal
(unordered-response) choices. Let the cardinality of the multi-dimen-
sional array be G (that is, there are G nominal unordered-response
variables in the choice space), and let g be the index for the nominal
variables (g = 1, 2, 3, …, G). In the empirical context of the current
paper, G = 2 (the nominal variables are level of RL and ACT). Also, let
Ig (Ig=2) be the number of alternatives corresponding to the gth nominal
variable and let ig be the corresponding index (ig = 1, 2, 3, …, Ig). Using
a typical utility maximizing framework for the nominal variables, the
utility for alternative ig for the gth nominal variable of individual q can
be written as:

where xqgig is a (Kg × 1)-column vector of exogenous attributes as well
as possibly the observed values of other endogenous nominal variables
(introduced as dummy variables), ßg is a (Kg × 1)-column vector of
corresponding coefficients, and eqgig is a normal scalar error term.
Vertically stack the vector of errors eqg = [(eqg1,eqg2,…,eqgIg)'] for each
individual. We will assume that the eqg vector is identically and in-
dependently distributed across individuals with a variance-covariance
matrix of <U+039B>g (note that we allow the individual scalar error terms eqgig to
be non-identical and non-independently distributed across alternatives
within an individual q). The size of eqg is (Ig×1), and the size of <U+039B>g is
(Ig×Ig). The model above may be written in a more compact form by
defining the following vectors and matrices: Uqg = (Uqg1,Uqg2,…,UqgIg)'
(Ig × 1 vector), xqg = (xqg1,xqg2,xqg3,…,xqgIg)'(Ig×Kg matrix), and
Vqg = xqgßg (Ig × 1 vector). Then, Uqg~MVNIg(Vqg,<U+039B>g), where MVNIg(Vqg,
<U+039B>g) is the multivariate normal distribution with mean vector Vqg and
covariance <U+039B>g.
Next, let uqg* = (Uqg2 - Uqg1,Uqg3 - Uqg1,…,UqgIg - Uqg1)'[(Ig - 1)
× 1) vector] (so uqg* is the vector of utility differences taken with re-
spect to the first alternative for nominal variable g). Now, for any
nominal variable, the full covariance matrix <U+039B>g of the original error
terms in the utilities is not identifiable. One approach to estimation,
typically used in univariate multinomial probit models, is to take the
difference of the utilities with respect to the first alternative (that is,
consider the differenced utility vector uqg*), and estimate the covar-
iance matrix of uqg* after scaling the first diagonal term to one. Defining
Mg as an (Ig - 1) × Ig matrix that corresponds to an (Ig - 1) identity
matrix with an extra column of -1's added as the first column, we may
write:

The discussion above focuses on a single nominal variable g. When

there are G nominal variables, consider the stacked G × 1 vector

The off-diagonal elements in <U+039E> capture the dependencies across the
utility differentials of different nominal variables, the differential being
taken with respect to the chosen alternative for each nominal variable.

2.1.2. The MDC outcome
Next, consider the ECAP MDC outcome. Following Bhat (2005) and
Bhat (2008), we assume that the decision maker q (a combination of the
child and her/his parents in this case) maximizes time utility subject to

a binding time budget constraint:

where the utility function Uq (t ) is quasi-concave, increasing and con-
tinuously differentiable, tq is the time investment vector of dimension
K × 1 with elements tqk(tqk = 0), tk, ak, and <U+03C8>qk are parameters asso-
ciated with activity purpose k, and Tq represents the time budget (i.e.
30 h over the course of the work week, as explained in Section 1.3) of
individual q for allocation among the K activity purposes (k = 1,2,
…,K). In our case, K is equal to 5 (academic, sports, arts, hobbies, and
(1)     in-home activities). The utility function form in Eq. (4) allows corner
solutions (i.e., zero consumptions) for activity purposes 1 through
K - 1 through the parameters tk, which allow corner solutions for these
alternatives while also serving the role of satiation (tk > 0 : k = 1, 2,
…, K - 1). On the other hand, the functional form for the final activity
purpose (in-home activity purpose in our analysis) ensures that some
time is invested in activity purpose K (activity purpose K is usually
referred to as an essential outside good in the microeconomics literature;
see Bhat, 2008).
The role of ak (ak = 1) in Eq. (4) is to capture satiation effects, with
a smaller value of ak implying higher satiation for activity purpose k. tk,
in addition to allowing zero consumptions, controls satiation by
translating consumption quantity, while ak controls satiation by ex-
ponentiating consumption quantity. Empirically speaking, it is difficult
to disentangle the effects of tk and ak separately, which leads to serious
empirical identification problems and estimation breakdowns when one
attempts to estimate both parameters for each good. Thus, Bhat (2008)
suggests estimating a t-profile (in which ak <U+2192> 0 for all alternatives, and
the tk terms are estimated) and an a-profile (in which the tk terms are
normalized to the value of one for all alternatives, and the ak terms are
estimated), and choosing the profile that provides a better statistical fit.
The term <U+03C8>qk in Eq. (4) represents the stochastic baseline marginal
utility for alternative k and individual q; that is, it is the marginal utility
at the point of zero time investment for alternative k for individual q.
The utility function in Eq. (4) constitutes a valid utility function if, in
addition to the constraints on the tk and ak parameters, as discussed
above, <U+03C8>qk = 0 for all k and q. To ensure this condition, <U+03C8>qk is para-
metrized as an exponential function of exogenous variable vector z qk
and a random error term as follows:

where is a column vector of coefficients and qk captures the idio-
syncratic characteristics that impact the baseline utility of individual q
and activity purpose k. We assume that the error terms qk are multi-
variate            normally              distributed             across            alternatives:
G
q = ( q1 , q2,…, qK ) ~MVNK (0K , ) . But only differences in the logarithm
of the baseline utilities matter, not the actual logarithm of the baseline
utility values (see Bhat, 2008). Thus, it will be easier to work with the
logarithm of the baseline utilities of the first K - 1 alternatives, and
normalize the logarithm of the baseline utility for the last alternative to
zero. That is, we write:


It should be clear from above that only the covariance matrix, say O
of the error difference vector <U+03BE>q = (<U+03BE>q1, <U+03BE>q2, …, <U+03BE>q, K-1), where
qk = ( qk        qK ) , is estimable, and not the covariance matrix                      of the


original error terms (equivalently, only the covariance matrix O of
q = ( q1 , q2,…, q, K 1) is estimable, not the covariance matrix of
q =     (                        )
q1 , q2,…, q, K 1 ). Further, because the sum of the time invest-
ments across activity purposes is equal to the total time budget, an
additional scale normalization needs to be imposed in the general
model of Eq. (4) (see Bhat, 2008). A convenient normalization is to set
the first element of O (that is, O11to one). Further, for ease in inter-
pretation of the covariance matrix O, we assume that the error term of
the “outside” alternative qK is independent of the error terms of the
“inside” alternatives qk (k = 1, 2,…, K 1). With this assumption, each
covariance matrix element of O can then immediately be interpreted as
a direct indicator of the extent of variance and covariance in the uti-
lities of the inside alternatives.

2.1.3. The joint model

Finally, to estimate the MDC variable and the nominal variables
jointly, jointness is generated in the utilities of the differenced vari-
ables. Specifically, the covariance of uq and q can be written as:


where T captures the covariance between the vectors uq and q .
Assuming that the base utilities of the “low density” (for the RL choice)
In particular, assume that the variance of qK is 0.5. Then, to normalize O11
to one, we should have that the variance of q1 is also 0.5. Let the variance of
qk (k       1, K )      be     sk2      and     the       covariance    between       k   and
k  ( k , k  =  1, 2, 3, … , K   1; k k ) be skk'. Then, the matrix O of the error dif-
ferences 

and “no active travel” (for the ACT choice) nominal categories, and the
base utility preference for the “in-home” category of the ECAP MDC
category, are independent of the utilities of all other non-base nominal/
ECAP utilities, T can be viewed as the covariance across the utilities of
the non-base nominal categories and the non-base ECAP extra-curri-
cular activities.
The model is estimated in GAUSS using the maximum approximated
composite marginal likelihood (MACML) approach (Bhat, 2011), which
is suitable for any context in which an MDC dependent variable and a
nominal dependent variable are estimated jointly. This method of es-
timation is a simplification of the generalized heterogeneous data
model (GHDM) proposed by Bhat et al. (2016), which in addition to
nominal and MDC variables, estimates jointly count and ordinal vari-
ables.

2.2. The data and sample description

The data used in this study were collected from a survey conducted
at four primary schools between November 2015 and June 2016 in
Hong Kong. In the survey, a child questionnaire was administered using
a face-to-face interview approach by a team of research assistants. The
interviews were held on-campus with selected child participants aged 5
to 12. The participating children were also asked to bring home a
parent questionnaire for one of their parents to fill in. Leung and Loo
(2017) provide more details about the school and participant sampling
methods. Detailed information about any weekly (from Monday to
Friday, no weekend) extra-curricular activities of the children, in-
cluding activity type, activity duration, travel time to activity, and
travel mode to activity were obtained in the survey.

2.2.1. Sample description

In this study, from the original raw data sample of 655 children, 103
were removed because of missing information on the endogenous
variables of interest. The final sample comprises information on the
residential locations and activity-travel patterns of 552 children.

Table 1 presents descriptive sample characteristics of the socio-de-             
mographic variables. Some interesting observations are as follows: (a)                
no specific age is dominant, though there are fewer 5-year old and 12-                
year old children, (b) boys are over-represented relative to girls, (c) a             
majority of the parents have received post-secondary (beyond high-                    
school) education (the education level of the parent corresponds to that              
of the parent who responds to the parent questionnaire), (d) more than                
a third of the households belong to the high income category (> HK$                   
59,999 per month), (e) as expected, motorized vehicle ownership in                    
Hong Kong is much less than in the US and many other Western                          
countries, (f) > 70% of the families with children have at least two                  
children, and (g) close to 60% of the children live in households in                  
which both parents work, while over a third of children live in house-                
holds where only the father works. When compared with the statistics                  
from the most recent census data (see final column of Table 1), as ob-                
tained from the Hong Kong Population By-census 2016 (CSD, 2018),                      
our sample is skewed toward boys, children from households with
highly educated parents, high household income, high motorized ve-                   
hicle ownership, and children with one or more siblings (for some of the
socio-demographic variables, comparable census information is not                          
available and so is not provided in Table 1). The over-representation of              
children from households with multiple children (siblings) may be at-                 
tributable to siblings attending the same school (Hui, 2015). Overall,                
however, the survey sample is not an unreasonable representation of                   
Hong Kong's population of children between 5 and 12 years of age.                     
In terms of the endogenous variables, the distribution of children                    
with respect to residential location (RL) is as follows: low density (48%;            
n = 265), medium density (24.6%; n = 136), and high density (27.4%;                   
n = 151). The distribution of the other nominal variable of ACT (active               
travel) is as follows: no active travel (40.9%; n = 226), some active                 
travel (28.1%; n = 155), and all active travel (31%; n = 171).                        
Table 2 provides the statistics on the ECAP MDC variable. The                    
second and third numeric columns indicate the number (percentage) of                  
individuals participating in each activity type and the mean duration of              
participation among those who participate, respectively. All children                 
participate in in-home activities during the work week, as may be ob-                 
served from the last row of the table. The mean duration in in-home                   
pursuits exceeds 25 h. Among the out-of-home (OH) extra-curricular                    
activities, children participate most in academic and sports activities,              
and the least in hobbies. However, conditional on participation, the                  
average duration of participation is highest in the academic purpose                  
(exceeding 3 h), and lowest in the arts activity purpose (an average of a             
little more than an hour and a half). These descriptive statistics suggest            
a relatively high baseline utility preference for the academic and sports             
activity purposes, and a clear high satiation for the arts activity pur-              
pose. The last two columns in Table 2 indicate the split between solo                 
participations and multiple activity participations. For the first four               
activity purposes, solo participation implies individual participation in             
only that activity purpose, in addition to the in-home activity purpose,              

while multiple activity participation refers to participation in at least
one other of the four OH extra-curricular activity purposes. For the in-
home activity purpose, solo participation corresponds to participation
in only in-home activities (no extra-curricular activity participation
outside the home), while multiple activity participation refers to par-
ticipation in in-home as well as at least one extra-curricular activity
outside the home. Thus, the number for the “academic” activity purpose
indicates that, of the 269 children participating in this activity purpose,
62 (or 23%) participated only in academic activity and in-home activity
during the work week, and 207 (or 77%) participated in academic ac-
tivity, in-home activity, and at least one of the remaining three extra-
curricular activity purposes. Other numbers and percentages can be
similarly interpreted. The main take-away is that there is a substantial
amount of participation in multiple extra-curricular activity purposes
during the work week, necessitating the use of our MDC framework for
modelling the ECAP variable.

3. Results

This section presents an overview of the model estimation results. A
number of model specifications were tested, and variables were care-
fully introduced or excluded based on considerations of behavioural
intuition and statistical significance. For the ECAP MDC mode compo-
nent, the t-profile (in which ak <U+2192> 0 for all alternatives, and the tk terms
are estimated) was found to offer a better statistical fit in this study.
Table 3 shows the estimated coefficients for the final utility function
specifications. The effects of exogenous variables (that is, the socio-
demographic variables) on the utility of alternatives (that is, the esti-
mates of the ßg vector elements on exogenous variables) for the nominal
variables RL and ACT, and the effects of exogenous variables on the
baseline preference (that is, the estimates of the d vector elements on
the exogenous variables), are presented in the next section, corre-
sponding to the linkage between the variables in the “Socio-demo-
graphic Characteristics” block with the “Environment-Activity-Travel
Decisions” block in Fig. 1. Then, the endogenous effects (that is, the
estimates of the ßg and d vector elements corresponding to the en-
dogenous variables) are presented in Section 3.2, which corresponds to
the joint modelling of the “Environment-Activity-Travel Decisions”
block in our conceptual framework in Fig. 1. This is followed by the
satiation parameters (the tk terms in the ECAP MDC model) in Section
3.3, as well as the estimates of the Gcovariance matrix in Section 3.4.
Sections 3.5 and 3.6 present information on likelihood and non-like-
lihood measures of fit, respectively. In the context of Fig. 1, Section 3.3
provides more specific detail about the ECAP block, while Sections
3.4–3.6 provide the empirical support by illustrating the superiority of
our joint model, corresponding to the joint choices of the “Environment-Activity-Travel Decisions” 
block, being influenced by the exogenous 
variables in the “Socio-demographic Characteristics” block, and
in turn influencing the “Child Outcomes” block (an independent model

not considering RL, ECAP, and ACT jointly would fail to address un-
observed factors such as residential self-selection effects).

3.1. Effects of exogenous variables

The first row in Table 3, provides the estimates of the alternative
specific constants, which do not have any substantive interpretations
because of the presence of the age continuous variable. For the age
variable, we examined alternative specifications, including a linear
continuous specification, dummy variables for various age ranges, as
well as a general piece-wise linear specification. Among these alter-
native specifications, the linear specification came out to be as good as
the most non-linear dummy variable specification (corresponding to a
dummy variable for each age) as well as a piece-wise linear specifica-
tion, and is the one used in the final specification because of its parsi-
monious nature. The effects of the exogenous variables are now dis-
cussed in the same order as they appear in Table 3, corresponding to the
linkage between the variables in the “Socio-demographic Character-
istics” block with the “Environment-Activity-Travel Decisions” block in
Fig. 1.

3.1.1. Age

The age of the child has no impact on residential location, but older
children (relative to younger children) have a higher baseline pre-
ference for participating in (and, consequently, also higher durations of
time-use, conditional on participation in) extra-curricular activities.
This is to be expected, as children develop more independence as they
grow older and parents are more likely to allow their children to be
away from home for longer periods of time (Schoeppe et al., 2015). For
similar reasons, older children are more likely than younger children to
partake in active travel, especially because of their better ability to
navigate traffic safely as a pedestrian or bicyclist. Parents' perceptions
of the neighbourhood traffic situation or “stranger danger” seem to be
at play here, and it would be sensible to target improving the neigh-
bourhood environment and social cohesion attributes to have a com-
munity that is all-inclusive and friendly for families with young chil-
dren (Schoeppe et al., 2015; Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Francis et al.,
2017).

3.1.2. Gender

Girls, relative to boys, have a higher baseline preference for arts-
related extra-curricular activities, suggesting gender-based variations in
extra-curricular activity participation as encouraged by parents and
societal norms. A similar result has also been observed in earlier studies
with respect to the higher participation of girls in music, dance-related,
and other artistic pursuits (see Sweeting and West, 2003; Mello and
Worrell, 2008; Holloway and Pimlott-Wilson, 2014). However, unlike
these earlier studies that have consistently indicated a higher partici-
pation of boys in sports-related activities, no variations were found in
our analysis between boys and girls in sports participation, pointing to a
more gender-neutral encouragement of sports participation in Hong
Kong relative to the US and other Western nations. Perhaps factors
transcending traditional gender roles may be at play here, such as
parental support for participation in sport activities for healthy physical
development of their children regardless of gender (Leung et al., 2017),
which calls for future literature to consider a more nuanced under-
standing of activities with respect to gender in the modern day. How-
ever, similar to results in the Western world, girls do still tend to spend
less time in active travel to activities, presumably because of parents'
rather asymmetric concerns for a daughter's vulnerability to social
dangers (including road safety issues when walking or bicycling) re-
lative to that of a son (see Mitra and Buliung, 2012). Besides, earlier
transportation studies have identified a higher safety consciousness and
motorized traffic-associated risk perception (to pedestrians and bicy-
clists) in girls relative to boys (see Kamargianni et al., 2015 and Bhat

et al., 2015). Ultimately then, it seems that Hong Kong is still quite
deeply rooted as a traditional patriarchal society (Karsten, 2014; Liong,
2017). The gender differences found suggest that these traditions do
influence parents' decisions on children's extra-curricular activities
(Simpkins et al., 2010), and they further seem to play a large part in the
different upbringing and behaviour in boys and girls. Targeted efforts to
improve arts participation in boys and active travel to activities in girls
could be considered.

3.1.3. Parent's education level

A high (post-secondary) educational level of the responding parent
(undergraduate or graduate studies) increases the probability of the
household to reside in a high density area. Highly educated individuals
tend to be more likely to have a green lifestyle (see Franzen and Vogl,
2013), because individuals with a higher education are better able to
assimilate environmental information quickly, and are more self-aware
of the negative consequences of degrading the environment (such as the
resulting health-related problems and global warming). And a green
lifestyle also positively affects residence in high density neighbour-
hoods with better access to transportation modes other than solo auto,
like public transit, walking, etc. (see, for example, de Abreu e Silva
et al., 2012 and Bhat, 2015). The results also reveal a positive effect of
parental education on children's participation in more activities after
school (specifically academic and arts-related activities), and this has
also been observed in the literature (see, for example, Pew Research
Center, 2015; Bray and Kwok, 2003; Hjorthol and Fyhri, 2009). Overall,
children in households with highly educated parents/guardians tend to
locate in denser neighbourhoods and participate more in academic and
“high culture” arts activities, most conceivably because they are better
able to access these types of activities and activity centres in high
density areas (Karsten, 2014), and also because these parents/guardians
may have higher expectations of their children and as a result arrange
their children to participate more in these extra-curricular activities for
their future all-rounded, whole person development (Bray and Kwok,
2003).

3.1.4. Household income

Lower income households appear to be less likely to reside in higher
density areas relative to higher income households, perhaps a reflection
of not being able to afford homes in urban locations. Chiu (2007)
provides a detailed overview of public and private housing in Hong
Kong, and notes that, while most Hong Kong housing developments are
high-rises, government-sponsored housing for lower-income house-
holds are usually in the urban periphery and new towns, where re-
sidential density is relatively lower. Higher income households, on the
other hand, are more likely to be living in newer, higher density multi-
tower private developments in urban areas. Our model results also
show that children living in lower income households (household
monthly income of < HK$ 30,000) tend to participate less in extra-
curricular activities in general (as can be observed from the many ne-
gative coefficients on the income variable in the ECAP model compo-
nent of Table 3). This effect of income is intuitive, because lower in-
comes constrain the money budget that can be allocated for extra-
curricular activities, while higher incomes provide the financial
wherewithal to indulge – an explicit show of indulgence may be viewed
as a socio-cultural vehicle to signal wealth, power and status, and pri-
vileged access to limited resources (de Castro and de Guzman, 2014).
Interestingly, the income effect is confined to non-academic activity
participation, but not academic extra-curricular activity participation.
This seems indicative of the widespread ubiquity of academic activities
among children across households of different walks of life. These
academic activities correspond mainly to tutorial or revision classes at
so-called “cram schools”, and would only typically require a room with
some tables, chairs and stationery. They are commonplace all around
Hong Kong, and will likely become even more accessible and affordable

in the future, as a consequence of various sociocultural factors such as
expectations from the family, peer pressure, and media culture (Yung
and Bray, 2016).

3.1.5. Presence of motorized vehicles

We do not consider the presence of motorized vehicles as an ex-
planatory variable of residential location, because motorized vehicle
ownership is likely to be co-determined with residential location. This
inter-dependence and jointness has been shown in many previous stu-
dies, including those by Paleti et al. (2013), Bhat et al. (2013), and Bhat
et al. (2016). In terms of the effects of motorized vehicle ownership on
children's ECAP, the results show that children living in households
with 1 or more motorized vehicles tend to participate more in (and
allocate more time to) extra-curricular activities (in particular, sports
and hobbies) than children living in households without motorized
vehicles. This is to be expected, because motorized vehicle ownership
increases the activity “reach” of children (Karsten, 2014; Holloway and
Pimlott-Wilson, 2014; Astroza et al., 2018). Further, the ubiquity of
locations for academic and arts pursuits in Hong Kong makes the trip
distances shorter for these kinds of activity participations (facilitating
participation by non-motorized modes of transportation and public
transport), while trip distances for sports and hobbies are longer
(making it more difficult to participate in sports and hobbies using non-
motorized modes and public transport). This is also observed in the fact
that, while about 55–65% of trips to academic and arts pursuits are
undertaken by active travel, the percentage drops to about 47% for
sports and hobbies. Finally, as expected, motorized vehicle ownership
has a negative impact on active travel, as also found in Copperman and
Bhat (2007) and Bhat et al. (2015).

3.1.6. Presence of siblings

The presence of one or more siblings has no statistically significant
impact on residential choice and active travel, but does affect ECAP. In
particular, a child with a sibling in the household has a higher baseline
preference for (is more likely to participate in, and spend more time in)
academic and sports activities. This may be because academic and
sports activities (such as a tutorial class or a tennis lesson or soccer
practice) lend themselves more easily to group participation (allowing
siblings to participate together, and also making it easier for parents to
drive multiple children to extra-curricular activities) (see, for example,
Allbaugh et al., 2016 and Price et al., 2017). Art/music-related activity
(such as piano or violin lessons), on the other hand, tend to be one-on-
one and hobby pursuits can be rather individual-specific as well, which
may be why the effect for these activity types are not as apparent in
terms of sibling presence.

3.1.7. Working status of parents

In our analysis sample, only 14 children (< 3% of all children) were
living in households with only a single parent. That is, almost all
children live in households with both parents. Further, only 12 children
lived in households with no parent working outside the home. Thus, to
consider the working status of parents, we used a simple dummy
variable representing whether both parents (in dual-parent households)
were working or not. The base category represents dual-parent house-
holds with only one parent working as well as the very small percentage
of single-parent households and/or dual-parent households with none
of the parents working. But, given the dominance of dual-parent
households with only one parent working in the base category, we will
interpret the results of the working status dummy variable simply as a
distinction, within dual-parent households, between both parents
working versus only one of the parents working. The results indicate
that, if both parents work outside the home, then the household is more
likely (relative to only one parent working) to reside in high density
locations rather than low density locations. The preference of families
with both parents working to live in the primary city may be a reflec-
tion of the benefits of knowledge spillovers (through formal and

informal personal interactions) that occur in dense urban regions, and
that provide and allow workers to retain (and enhance) their compe-
titive edge in the market place (see Autant-Bernard and LeSage, 2011).
Additionally, children living in households with both parents working
appear to be less likely to partake in active travel relative to their peers
in households with only one parent working. Perhaps non-working
parents are willing to spend the additional time investment (relative to
driving) involved in walking/bicycling when accompanying their chil-
dren to extra-curricular activities, while children with dual-working
parents are more likely to be driven to activities because of the time
constraints on the working parents.

3.2. Endogenous effects

A number of different directions of recursive endogenous effects
were tested, but the preferred one corresponds to the long-term re-
sidential location decision (RL) influencing the medium-term decision
(ACT), and both of these impacting the short-term ECAP decision. This
corresponds to the joint modelling of the “Environment-Activity-Travel
Decisions” block in our conceptual framework in Fig. 1.
At least three observations may be made from Table 3 regarding
endogenous effects. First, children living in households located in
medium or high density neighbourhoods are more likely to participate
in sports and arts activities (in comparison to children living in low
density neighbourhoods), presumably because they are more con-
veniently located to access a greater range of activity/recreation loca-
tions (such as parks, museums, and community centres). This result is
consistent with the studies of Ding et al. (2013) and Born et al. (2014),
both of which identify proximity to activities (such as parks and ex-
ercise facilities) as promoters of physical activity and leisure. This
finding has important implications in a geographical and urban plan-
ning context, because the association of higher density neighbourhoods
with more activity participation can potentially inform policymakers on
the planning of where to locate future activity/recreation venues for the
greatest benefit of children and adults alike.
Second, higher density living is also related to higher levels of use of
active transport by children to access extra-curricular activities. This
impact may be attributed to higher densities being strongly correlated
with better walk and bicycle infrastructure, as well as higher density
areas providing more activity opportunities in close proximity that can
be travelled to by active transport. Indeed, earlier time-use and physical
activity studies, such as McCormack et al. (2014) and Sallis et al.
(2016), indicate that higher density increases time spent in neigh-
bourhood physical activity (primarily walking). Once again, this
finding is highly beneficial for policymakers to design and maintain
compact and walkable communities with a healthy mix of land uses
(Loo et al., 2017).
Third, children who partake in active transport to access extra-
curricular activities are more likely than their peers to spend time in
sports activities. This complementary tendency between active trans-
port use and active physical activity in recreational pursuits has been
observed by Copperman and Bhat (2007) and Stewart et al. (2017) too.
This finding provides evidence that greater after-school sport time use
and active travel to activities may reinforce one another. This in turn
provides support for parents and educators to act as role models and
further promote a physically active lifestyle among children, in order
for children to develop and maintain these healthy habits as they grow
up into teenagers and young adults (Yang et al., 2014; Craigie et al.,
2011).

3.3. Satiation parameters

The tk satiation parameters are presented in the last row of Table 3,
and provides more specific detail about the ECAP block in the context of
Fig. 1. Satiation for a specific extra-curricular activity purpose k
(k = 1,2, …,K–1) increases as tk gets closer to zero. tk is not relevant for

the in-home activity in the t-profile because the in-home activity is                                
always participated in, but satiation in the in-home activity is accom-                          
modated because as aK <U+2192> 0, which implies that the utility contribution                           
of the in-home alternative,                (tqK ) K , in Eq. (4), gets transformed to            
1
K qK
a non-linear utility term <U+03C8>qK ln (tqK). As expected initially from the de-                       
scriptive statistics, the extra-curricular arts activity in Table 3 has the                      
highest satiation rate (lowest value of tk at 1.641). The high satiation                         
rate for the arts activity means that participating in a shorter time                            
period is already enough to achieve the same utility as compared with                            
the other activity types. The satiation rates for the other extra-curri-                         
cular activities are not as high as the arts activity, but in a similar range.                   
This finding shows that arts activities do not usually last too long, in                         
comparison with academic or sports activities. A musical instrument                              
lesson would typically last around one hour, and meet once a week,                               
whereas sporting practice or tutorial classes could conceivably last                             
anywhere from one to three hours per session, and there may be more                              
than one session per week. This is why we consider duration as well as                           
activity type in children's ECAP, because considering activity type alone                        
would remove the important details relating to time use and lead to a                            
poorer and less accurate modelling framework.                                                    						
												
3.4. Variance-covariance matrix of the error terms                                               
												
Table 4 presents the estimated covariance matrix G of the error                             
terms in the joint model (only the lower diagonal elements are pre-                              
sented, because of the symmetric nature of the covariance matrix),                               
where significant error correlations would be indicative of the presence                         
of unobserved factors that need to be considered. Many different spe-                            
cifications were considered for this covariance matrix. Interestingly, the
diagonal blocks of the matrix (corresponding to the covariance within                            
alternatives for each of the RL, ECAP, and ACT model components)
were not significantly different from diagonal values of one and cov-                                
ariances of 0.5. Thus, these are fixed in our estimation. The implication                        
is that the original error terms in the vectors eqg (representing the uti-                       
lities of alternatives within the RL choice and within the ACT choice)                           
are identically and independently distributed (IID) of each other (for                           
each of g = 1 corresponding to the RL nominal choice and g = 2 cor-                              
responding to the ACT nominal choice). Similarly, q1, q2, …, qK of al-                           
ternatives of the ECAP MDC model component are IID of each other.                                
This is a result that just happens to be in our case, and we would not                           
know if this is the case or not unless we estimated a more general model                         
that allows the error terms within each of the three model components                            
to be non-identical and correlated.                                                              

From the results presented in Table 4, it can also be observed that
there are some significant error correlations across the RL, ECAP, and
ACT components (see the off-diagonal block of the matrix). In parti-
cular, there are common unobserved statistically significant correlation
effects between the medium/high density utilities of the RL and the
ECAP baseline utilities of arts activities (a covariance of 0.12 between
the utility of the medium density alternative and the arts baseline uti-
lity, a covariance of 0.27 between the utility of the high density alter-
native and the arts baseline utility, and a covariance of 0.43 between
the utility of the high density alternative and the hobbies baseline
utility). One possible explanation is that neighbourhoods with high
residential density are also key activity nodes with mixed land use that
support specialized arts pursuits as well as diverse hobby activities for
children to join. In addition, there is a positive statistically significant
covariance (0.19) between the utilities of the RL high density alter-
native and the ACT “all travel is active travel” alternative, as well as
positive statistically significant covariances between the ECAP sports
baseline utility and the utility of the ACT “all travel is active travel”
alternative. These findings lend support to the observations in Bhat
et al. (2016) that adults in households with a green lifestyle (un-
observed factor) tend to locate in high density neighbourhoods, are
more likely to pursue sports-related activities, and also partake more in
active travel. As the values and lifestyles of parents permeate to the
children, children living in high density areas appear intrinsically more
likely also to pursue sports-related activities and active transport. In
other words, these findings show that when considering the effect of
residential density on children's activity-travel behaviour, it is important 
to take into account these unobserved factors, or else risk
overstating the effect of the neighbourhood environment.

3.5. Likelihood based goodness of fit measures

So, does the joint model provide a better data fit? The joint and
independent models may be compared using the adjusted composite
likelihood ratio test (ADCLRT) statistic that is approximately chi-
squared distributed (Bhat, 2011). The ADCLRT statistic value of com-
parison between the two models is 41.35. This value is higher than the
chi-squared value corresponding to six degrees of freedom (based on
the six covariance elements in Table 4) at the 0.05 level of statistical
significance, which demonstrates the superior statistical fit of the joint
model. Recently, Bhat (2018) demonstrated that the traditional like-
lihood-based tests for MDC models provides data fit only for the con-
tinuous values of consumption and, hence, a discrete consumption test
is still needed. Following Bhat's (2018) likelihood form for the discrete

consumption, we computed the predictive composite log-likelihood at
convergence of the joint and independent models (-11,277.38
and - 11,491.02, respectively), considering only the discrete partici-
pation decision in the ECAP MDC model component. In this case, the
ADCLRT statistic is 42.65, clearly indicating that the joint model is
statistically superior to the independent model also in terms of the
discrete event prediction.

3.6. Additional (non-likelihood based) goodness of fit measures

The likelihood-based tests (for the comparison of the independent
and joint models) constitute disaggregate measures of fit that consider
performance at the multivariate and disaggregate level. But, they are
not the most intuitive. So, we also evaluate the performance of the two
models intuitively and informally at an aggregate level through a
heuristic diagnostic check of model fit by computing the predicted
aggregate share of individuals for each multivariate outcome. In par-
ticular, we first compute the probability of each child participating in
each of the 36 possible combinations of RL (three categories), ECAP
(five categories), and ACT (three categories). The probabilities for each
combination are averaged across individuals to obtain the predicted
percentage of individuals falling into each combination category. The
predicted probabilities are then compared with the actual percentage of
children in each combination category using the weighted mean abso-
lute percentage error (MAPE) statistic. To keep the presentation man-
ageable, we confine our attention to the four out-of-home extra-curri-
cular activities for the ECAP component and focus our results on the top
ten combination categories of the resultant RL, ECAP, and ACT choices.
The results are summarized in the top panel of Table 5. The first nu-
merical entry indicates that 5.62% of the children in the sample live in a
low density neighbourhood, participate only in the extra-curricular
sports activity, and engage in active travel. For that same multivariate
combination, the joint model predicts a 4.65% share, while the in-
dependent model predicts a 4.12% share. Other numerical entries can
be similarly interpreted. Overall, the MAPE values clearly indicate that
the joint model does much better in prediction for any of the top 10

combinations listed in Table 5. Across all the ten combination cate-
gories, the weighted MAPE is about 60% higher for the independent
model predictions (18.06 versus 29.12).
In the bottom panel of Table 5, we move beyond the discrete event
predictions discussed in the last paragraph to present predictions for the
continuous measure of the ECAP MDC variable (actual amount of al-
located time). We do so by computing the percentage of the time-
budget that is allocated to each of the extra-curricular activity purposes
for children falling in a particular combination of residential density
and active travel level. Again, only the statistics for the ten combina-
tions with the highest time budget shares in the sample are summar-
ized. Similar to the participation prediction case, the joint model pro-
vides a much better data fit (in comparison to the independent model)
in the prediction of the actual amount of time spent in each activity
type, no matter the density category and the level of active travel.
Overall, the weighted MAPE is about 50% higher for the independent
model predictions (15.17 versus 23.25). The above findings lend strong
support to the employment of the joint model for this study, and justify
our consideration of RL, ECAP, and ACT as intertwined and fully in-
tegrated in the “Environment-Activity-Travel Decisions” block in the
conceptual framework (Fig. 1).

4. Treatment effects based on residential location choice

In this section, the joint model is used to assess the impact of re-
sidential location choice (the “treatment”) on the children-related ECAP
and ACT dependent variables (the “outcomes”). An important measure
to do so is the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) (see Heckman et al.,
2001), which provides the expected change in the share of each ECAP
and ACT alternative for a random child if s/he were located in a specific
residential density configuration i as opposed to another residential
density configuration i' <U+2260> i.
For the ECAP variable, we focus only on the participation dimension
here and compute the ATE measure for the extra-curricular activity k
(k = 1,2, …,K–1) as follows:
											   								                   
the magnitude of the ATE from the independent model is always higher
where tqk is the time spent by child q on the extra-curricular activity k                 
and aqi is the dummy variable taking the value ‘1’ if child q resides in                   
residential density category i. To compute the probability that tqk > 0,                   
we draw, for each child, 100 sets of 1000 realizations from a multi-                       
variate normal sampling distribution of estimated parameters and the                       
distribution of the error terms involved. For each child, each set, and                    
each realization, we use the forecasting algorithm of Pinjari and Bhat                     
(2010) to predict time allocations, and then, for each child and each set,                 
evaluate the share of the 1000 realizations that predicted tqk > 0 for                     
each of the two density categories involved. The treatment effect is then                  
computed as in Eq. (8) for each set, and the mean across all the 100 sets                  
is computed as the final ATE effect and the standard deviation across                      
the 100 sets is computed as the standard error estimate. The calculation                   
of ATE effects are helpful not only to obtain insights regarding whether,                  
and how much, neourbanist design measures impact activity- and                             
travel-related behaviours in the local context (Bhat et al., 2016), but                    
also to understand the differences between the joint and independent                       
models, and which model formulation is superior.                                           
For the ACT nominal variable, we compute the ATE measure as                                 
follows:                                                                                   
                                                                 											
where g could be “no active travel”, “some active travel”, or “all active                  
travel”.                                                                                   
The ATE measures above can be computed for all the pairwise                            
combinations of residential density categories. Here, we focus on the                      
case when a household in the lowest density neighbourhood is trans-                        
planted to the highest density neighbourhood. Table 6 presents the                         
estimated ATE values (and standard errors) for both the ECAP and ACT                       
variables. The first four numeric rows of the table provide the ATE                        
values with respect to each of the extra-curricular activity purposes. For                 
example, the ATE point estimate for the joint model corresponding to                       
academic activities indicates that the probability of participating in                     
academic activities reduces, on average, by 0.018 (standard error of                       
0.002) if a child belonging to a random household is transplanted from
the low residential density location to the high residential density lo-
cation. In other words, if 1000 random children are relocated from the                        
low density neighbourhood to the high density neighbourhood, the
point estimate indicates a reduction in academic activities by 18 par-
ticipations during the course of the week. On the other hand, the cor-                     
responding ATE point prediction for the independent model is -0.022                        
(standard error of 0.001). Other ATE estimates may be similarly in-                           
terpreted. As expected based on the results from Section 3.2.2, trans-                    
planting a child from a low density to a high density neighbourhood                        

also increases the probability of participation in sports and arts, and
reduces participation in hobbies. For all the four ECAP activity types,
than from the joint model.5 The fundamental reason is the presence of
common unobserved factors that influence children's ECAP participa-
tion and residential location choice (as discussed in Section 3.4). For
instance, children of families who live in high residential density
neighbourhoods are pre-disposed to higher sports participation than
their peers living in lower residential density areas. That is, children of
families who would like their children to participate in sports tend to
locate themselves in high residential density areas. The independent
model, because it ignores this tendency, attributes more of the differ-
ence in sports activity participation between children in low density
and high density neighbourhoods to the density change, while the joint
model controls for the unobserved residential self-selection effect to
provide the “true” causal effect of residential density change on sports
activity participation. Of course, the effects on any given activity pur-
pose will depend on effects on other activity purposes, and so the un-
observed covariance effects in Section 3.4 translate to differences in the
ATE estimates for all activity purposes between the joint and in-
dependent models.
The bottom two rows of Table 6 provide the ATE effects for the
“some active travel” and “all active travel” categories (note that we do
not show the effects for the “no active travel” category, because the ATE
effects for all three categories should sum to zero). Under the joint
model, if a child belonging to a random household is shifted from the
low residential density category location to the high one, the prob-
ability of “some active travel” increases by an average of 0.087 (stan-
dard error is 0.005) and the probability of “all active travel” increases
by an average of 0.106 (standard error of 0.006).6 Specifically, if 1000
random children are relocated from the low density neighbourhood to
the high density neighbourhood, the point estimate indicates that 87
more children will use active travel for some (but not all) of their extra-
curricular activities, and 106 children will use active travel to access all
of their extra-curricular activities. Again, the independent model ex-
aggerates this residential density change effect by predicting, for the
same scenario, that 103 more children will start using active travel for
some (but not all) of their extra-curricular activities and 122 children
will use active travel to access all of their extra-curricular activities. The
exaggeration by the independent model is because of the residential

self-selection effect with respect to active travel. As discussed earlier in
Section 3.4, households with a green lifestyle propensity may both lo-
cate in high density neighbourhoods (looking for compact neighbour-
hoods with easy access to public transportation, bike lanes, etc.) as well
as participate more in active travel (using an alternative mode of
transportation such as bike and walk). The independent model cannot
disentangle this self-selection association between residential location
and active travel from the “true” effect of residential location on active
travel. To be precise, the independent model combines these two ef-
fects, resulting in the exaggerated ATE for “all active travel”. The ATE
also is exaggerated for the “some active travel”, even though there is no
covariance between “some active travel” and “high density location”.
This is simply because of coefficient effect changes (between the joint
and independent models) resulting from the introduction of covariance
terms in the joint model.
One can also quantify the magnitude of the spurious residential self-
selection effect and the “true” residential effect. As just discussed, the
independent model comingles both of these effects, while the joint
model estimates the “true” residential effect. Because the independent
model consistently exaggerates the ATE, the “true” effect may be
computed as a percentage of the joint model ATE relative to the in-
dependent model ATE, while the self-selection effect may be computed
as the difference of the ATE of the two models as a percentage of the
independent ATE. The last two columns of Table 6 indicate that un-
observed self-selection effects are estimated, based on the point esti-
mates, to constitute about 10–20% of the difference in the ECAP and
ACT variables between low density and high density households, while
“true” built environment effects constitute the remaining 80–90% of the
difference. To summarize, the results do show that residential living
density has important “true” effects on children's activity-travel beha-
viour, but these effects are exaggerated when residential self-selection
is ignored.

5. Conclusions

Although there is a recognition that children's activity schedules are
closely interwoven with those of their parents, and determine overall
household activity-travel rhythms, much of the earlier literature on
children's activity-travel behaviour has been confined (from a topical
standpoint) to school travel and (from a geographical standpoint) to the
Western Hemisphere. In this paper, the substantive focus is on chil-
dren's extra-curricular activities, and the geographic focus is on a high
density urban environment in East Asia, specifically Hong Kong. A
better understanding of children's extra-curricular activity and travel in
such high density, walkable environments can provide key insights into
the downstream modelling of travel demand patterns of both children
and adults. Further, by focusing on extra-curricular activities as well as
active transport of children, there is an opportunity to significantly
reduce negative transport externalities, help promote active lifestyles
during childhood, and shape a child's future behaviour as a traveller
(and as a citizen in general). In addition, our study here also contributes
more broadly to child development considerations within a more hol-
istic framework of children's overall life-satisfaction and wellbeing.
This paper has offered a framework to understand children's extra-
curricular activities time allocation and active travel participation in
Hong Kong. Three variables of interest are considered: weekly time
spent in four different types of out-of-home after-school activities
(academic, sports, arts, and hobbies), level of active travel, and re-
sidential location choice (based on residential density). The proposed
model takes into account common observed and unobserved effects that
can be affecting the three outcomes simultaneously.
The results indicate important demographic effects of the child on
the child's extra-curricular activity participation and travel. Older
children are more likely to partake in extra-curricular activities as well
as active travel to these activities. Similar to many studies in the
Western world, girls appear to be more likely than boys to participate in

arts activities and less likely to walk/bicycle to activities. However, we
did not find a statistically significant variation between boys and girls
in sports participation, unlike multiple studies in the US and other
Western nations that suggest a higher sports participation rate among
boys. In addition to child demographics, family demographics also play
a role in children's activity-travel behaviour. Children in households
with highly educated adults tend to participate more in academics and
“high culture” arts activity opportunities, while those in lower income
households tend to participate less in extra-curricular activities in
general (except for academic pursuits). Ownership of motorized vehicle
(s) in a household promotes children's participation in sports, but also
reduces active travel. The former effect may be attributable to the re-
latively long distances to travel to sports activities relative to other
activities. Other results include the higher likelihood of children with
siblings to participate in sports and academic activities, and a lower
tendency of active travel among children with both parents working.
Overall, the findings show that children's activity and travel beha-
viour within the same city can differ quite substantially based on
neighbourhood environment (notably residential density) and family
socio-demographic background. The empirical findings and analysis
provide insights for policy development. First, children with parents of
lower socioeconomic status (SES, as determined by education and in-
come earnings) and children with no siblings participate less in extra-
curricular activities in general, and policies that particularly target
these segments of children for promoting extra-curricular activities
appear to be warranted. Since 2002, non-government entities in Hong
Kong have made available, to children of lower SES, some financial
assistance to facilitate participation in extra-curricular activities
deemed beneficial to the child's “whole-person development” (EDB,
2018). The continuation and expansion of such a policy with higher
funding amounts and a wider set of eligible extra-curricular activity
purposes needs careful consideration. This is particularly important
because a higher rate of participation in extra-curricular activities has
been shown to be even more beneficial for children of lower SES status
than their more privileged counterparts (Dumais, 2006; Kawashima-
Ginsberg, 2014), and may provide key opportunities to meet new
friends, learn to work as a team, develop social skills and fairness
concepts, and develop positive character traits (Snellman et al., 2015).
Second, the result regarding the lower active travel among children of
dual-working parents suggest that time poverty effects are at play here;
that is, time constraints make it difficult for parents to partake in ac-
tivities with their children that provide relaxation, stress alleviation,
and physical exercise, all of which contribute to both physical and
mental well-being. At the same time, the share of dual-earner house-
holds in Hong Kong has risen in the past few decades, at least in part
due to financial pressures of living in a high-cost city (HKCSS, 2013).
The implication is that individuals in dual-earner households face a
work-family conflict situation that permeates into their children's
physical activity lifestyle, suggesting the need to rigorously evaluate
and consider the implementation of work-friendly policies such as
proportional wages for part-time work, flexible work scheduling, tele-
working, and related government policies (see, for example, Goodin,
2010). Doing so may also be advantageous to employers because of a
potential increase in job satisfaction and improved work productivity
(see, for example, Choi, 2009 and Wong and Ko, 2009). To summarize,
company policies designed to provide a sense of empowerment to
employees to take care of personal and family situations can help instil
a stronger sense of work-family balance that benefits the next genera-
tion of adults and society as a whole. Third, the effect of motorized
vehicle ownership on children's activity-travel patterns, when com-
bined with the effect of residential density, suggests that policies that
encourage mixed-land use planning and compact development re-
inforce each other in increasing physical activity participation of chil-
dren, both in the form of sports activity participation and utilitarian
active travel to activity centres. Thus, mixed and compact development
not only seems to be an instrument to reduce traffic congestion, energy

dependence, and air pollution, but also an effective tool to promote an
active lifestyle among children, with far-reaching public health bene-
fits. Relatedly, our results also recommend that government-led and
non-government-led initiatives, such as walking school buses and Safe
Routes to School programs (see Walking School Bus, 2018 and Safe
Routes to School, 2018), be continued to increase active travel between
home, school, and after-school activities, especially in the higher den-
sity suburban and urban areas.
From a travel demand modelling standpoint, one of the limitations
of current activity-based travel demand model systems is the in-
adequate attention and modelling of the activity patterns of children.
Not only does this result in the absence of much needed policy in-
formation for promoting participation in extra-curricular activities and
active lifestyles, as just discussed earlier, but it can also result in rela-
tively inaccurate predictions of the activity-travel patterns of adults. In
particular, the ability to model children's activity engagement (and the
interactions between these engagements and those of adults) within
larger activity-based travel model systems would offer a strong basis for
forecasting travel in response to shifts in population demographics over
time, or land-use and transportation policies. In this context, the model
presented in this paper offers a framework for representing and ana-
lysing the activity-travel patterns of children within larger travel de-
mand model systems.
In closing, this study represents a formulation and application of a
joint econometric framework to examine household residential location
choice, children's activity participation and time-use, and children's
active travel levels. Future research should further explore intra-
household interactions as a priority area for undertaking time-use re-
search, as part of a family-based activity-travel generation and sche-
duling process.