The determinants of commuting mode choice among school children
in Beijing

abstract
This study explores the determinants of travel mode choice for journeys to school by students aged 13–15
in Beijing. The descriptive and regression outcomes show that there is a spatial diversity in travel patterns 
across the city. Students who live in the suburban areas travel longer distances than those who live
in the core centre of the city, where most of the good-quality schools are located. In the core area, for students 
whose school is within 3 km of home, cycling is more popular than other modes. For students who
must travel further than 3 km, there is a signi<U+FB01>cant modal split between households with different
socioeconomic status and car ownership. Among the most in<U+FB02>uential factors, policy factors such as the
population policy of China and the impact of education policy on different social groups tend to make
the determinants of school children’s commuting mode choice more complicated.                                                          

1. Introduction                                                                             
											
Travel mode choice among school children has been widely discussed 
in recent years. These discussions have mainly occurred in                       
the western context, due to the increasing use of cars to transport                     
children to and from school and a decline in walking and cycling in                     
these countries. The increasing use of cars to get children to school                   
has negative economic, health, social and environmental effects.                        
For example, it is reported that car dependence is a major contribution 
to a higher rate of childhood obesity in the US (e.g. McDonald,                    
2008a). In addition, it is argued that traf<U+FB01>c congestion in peak                        
hours will worsen should more children be chauffeured by parents                        
(Mackett, 2002; Wen et al., 2008; Black et al., 2001). Travel mode                      
choice is also related to social exclusion (McDonald, 2008c).                           
Generally speaking, while modal choice among children is a transport 
issue, it is also a health and social issue (McMillan, 2005).                      
According to previous studies, many factors may affect modal                       
choice among children (see Section 2). These include home–school                        
distance, the personal characteristics of children and their household, 
the built environment and the speci<U+FB01>c transport culture of                        
a given space.                                                                          
											
In relation to the situation in China, special contextual factors
may lead to even more variation in modal choice among children.
Firstly, the rapid spatial expansion of cities and the lag in the construction 
of more educational institutions have led to longer travel
distances among children. Secondly, transport resources are
unevenly distributed among different socioeconomic groups. As
household income, hukou status, car ownership and living location
all interact with transport resources, this suggests those less well
off may be forced to live in less accessible areas, with fewer schooling 
choices. Hukou institution is a special population policy in
China. It was introduced in the 1950s in order to control the movement 
of the rural population to the big cities. It was used to distribute 
the state’s welfare, and residents with an urban hukou
received a higher level of the state’s welfare than a resident with
rural hukou. This institution continues till now. Residents with
and without local urban hukou are treated differently. Residents
without local urban hukou, such as the migrant low-income workers 
usually are not quali<U+FB01>ed to access to local basic services at a
normal round, such as education, medical care and other welfares.
Finally, various educational policies (e.g. techangsheng, zhankengsheng), 
favouring children in higher socioeconomic groups, gives
them the opportunity to travel further for a better education, and
relatively more modal choices enable them to do so.
The determinants of children’s travel behaviour could be
explained with the socio-ecological model (e.g. Green et al.,
1996; Stokols et al., 1996). According to the mode, <U+FB01>rstly, a child’s
travel features would be affected not only by theirs socioeconomic											

features but also by a set of environmental factors including household 
characteristics, socio-spatial environment and the policy environment. 
However, previous studies are short of a thorough
discussion on socio-spatial environment and the policy environment. 
Secondly, social structure is one of important aspects of
social process. Social exclusion is one of key indicators of social
structure. Transport-related social exclusion is often addressed in
the <U+FB01>eld of transport study (e.g. Lucas and Jones, 2012; Lucas,
2003). Many researchers believe that a child’ travel mode could
reveal the degree at which the child is socially included (e.g.
Talen, 2001; Loo and Lam, 2013).
This paper will explore the determinants of travel mode choice
among school children in China, looking at the case of Beijing. This
paper will contribute to the present literature in two respects.
Firstly, a consideration of the speci<U+FB01>c institutional factors, such
as housing reform, the hukou system and the heterogeneous urban
education policies will broaden the research framework for studies
of travel mode decisions among children. Secondly, providing new
evidence from Beijing will compensate for the limited research in
this <U+FB01>eld in developing countries.

2. Linking social exclusion and modal choice among children

Social exclusion refers to a situation where certain members of
society are separated from the normal ‘sphere’ of living and working 
in society (Johnston et al., 2000). Some social groups are more
adversely affected than others, especially children. These unequal
outcomes reduce people’s ability to fully participate in society
and can lead to more signi<U+FB01>cant social exclusion (Lucas and
Jones, 2012). Poor educational achievement in particular, is
regarded as an essential aspect of social exclusion (Lucas, 2003).
Transportation plays an important role in social exclusion. Poor
transport, including lack of transportation infrastructure and personal 
transportation resources, can deprive people, especially the
disadvantaged in society, of equal opportunities to participate in
daily activities (Hanson et al., 2004). Social exclusion can, in turn,
be exacerbated by poor access to public services and facilities
(Pickup and Giuliano, 2005). This relationship echoes Lucas’
(2003) views on the interaction between transport and social
exclusion. The notion of socially sustainable urban transportation
has been proposed as a theoretical attempt to understand the role
of transportation in social inclusion (Boschmann and Kwan, 2008)
and achieve a more equal and inclusive society. Children are considered 
to be a special group of transportation research for their
role as both bene<U+FB01>ts and victims of the high-mobility society
(Uth Thomsen, 2004). Among children, the transportation
resources are unequally distributed, and the equality also contribute 
to diverse choices when it comes to schooling, attenuating
the role of education in decreasing intergenerational poverty.
There are some studies that have paid attention to the relationship 
between transport and social inclusion among children, most
of which aim to determine the relationship between school accessibility 
and school achievement. It is worth mentioning that Talen’s
(2001) study was conducted against the background of longer travel 
distances faced by children as a result of primary school consolidation 
in Virginia. The effect of a decrease in accessibility on
school achievement was evaluated in this study, with the <U+FB01>ndings
revealing ‘unpatterned inequity’ among children and a reverse
relationship between travel distance and school achievement for
students in Grade Three. Recently, an empirical study in a rural
area of Taiwan found a similar connection between travel distances
and school achievement among junior secondary school students
(Lin et al., 2013).
Travel mode choice is signi<U+FB01>cantly related to social exclusion.
To begin with, children from low-income families are forced to

attend schools close to home because of the limited transportation
options available, and the quality of schools near low-income
neighbourhoods remains low. In contrast, their wealthier counterparts 
can obtain a better education because they have access to a
car, which enlarges their scope for activity. Moreover, parents in
higher socioeconomic groups can choose to live near schools of
high quality, which may enable children to walk to school, or at
least shorten the travel distance and time. In this respect, housing
prices might increase, pushing families of lower socioeconomic
status out of certain neighbourhoods, making social exclusion even
worse. It needs to be recognized that mode choice is one indicator
showing social exclusion. For example, for the students who have
the same travel mode, they may actually be faced to different level
of social exclusion due to their family situation or other factors.
From the ecological perspective, the continuing interactions
between people and the environment could shape the social structure 
through complex processes such as concentration and segregation 
(e.g. Alihan, 1938, pp. 136–166). Different levels of
environmental in<U+FB02>uences, especially the socio-economic and the
policy factors are essential determinants of the school choice of
children and their travel mode choice. In this sense, individual children’s 
mode choice could be an indicator of the distribution of educational 
opportunities and the resources. The features of a child’s
mode choice could be used to investigate social exclusion caused
by the distribution of education sources.

3. Literature review: Key factors in modal choice among
children

Researchers have found that there are various factors in<U+FB02>uencing 
modal choices among children, especially the choice of active
modes such as cycling and walking. The socio-ecological model is
often applied to explain the determinants of physical activity
(e.g. Green et al., 1996; Stokols et al., 1996). From the ecological
perspective, physical activity links to the social and physical environment. 
Different levels of factors exert disproportional amount
of in<U+FB02>uences on physical activity (Grzywacz and Fuqua, 2000).
The in<U+FB02>uencing factors could be categorized into individual-level
in<U+FB02>uences, household-level in<U+FB02>uences, surrounding environment
in<U+FB02>uences and policy in<U+FB02>uences (see Fig. 1). The existing
researches believe that the outcome of modal choice among children 
re<U+FB02>ects the complex interactions between children and their
surrounding environment. The following texts will review the
existing literature on the multi-level determinants of modal choice
among children from a socio-ecological perspective.
In this paper, individual characteristics and household features
are internal factors. Surrounding environment and policy environment 
are seen as external factors. The surrounding environment
refers to the broad living and studying environment the child is
exposed to. It includes the built environment, the perceptive environment 
to children and their parents’ mind. Community environment 
(e.g. the number of peers living with the child and crime rate
of the community) and the school quality can be in<U+FB02>uential to form
the perceptive environment. The local customs and the travel culture 
can be conductive to the modal choice and these variables also
belong to surrounding environment. Following the surrounding
environment, policies are another type of factor in<U+FB02>uencing children’s 
travel mode. The policies usually include education, population, 
transportation and planning policies and legislation. These
policies may constrain or promote school accessibility, affecting
the modal choices of children.

3.1. Individual level

Demographic factors, referring to children’s characteristics, are
of relevance here, the most widely discussed of which are gender

and age. Based on data analysis, most researchers believe that
there is a positive relationship between age and the independent
behaviour of students (Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Yeung et al.,
2008; Loo and Lam, 2013). Gender is another factor, but quite controversial. 
Some research has found that there is a signi<U+FB01>cant difference 
in travel behaviour between gender, showing that girls
are less likely to commute to school by foot or bicycle by themselves, 
especially at an early age (McMillan et al., 2006;
McDonald, 2012). However, more nuanced conclusions have also
been expressed. It has been found that when considering modal
choice, parents are more sensitive when the child is a girl and
when the child is younger; however, the differences between the
sexes weakened as the children grow older (McDonald, 2012).
Other individual factors such as race (McDonald, 2008c) and suburban/urban 
location (Mitra et al., 2010) are also mentioned in
the previous studies. The minorities tend to travel more actively
and similar conclusions have been reached in research within different 
regions (Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009; Wafa
and Rachel, 2014).

3.2. Household level

The choice of school itself is a complex question (Van Goeverden
and Boer, 2013) and the attributes of households acts a key role in
the process of school choice. The choice of travel mode to and from
school is in fact the outcome of school selection, accessible transport
means and other factors. Moreover, the choice of school may be the
result of a number of factors other than distance. Parents’ perceptions 
can also moderate the selective process. Whether parents
are willing to choose a school of higher quality for their children will
depend on the extent to which parents think this is important.
Factors such as the educational experience of the parents and the
household income may also contribute to the choice.
Socioeconomic status (SES) is a variable that affects the speci<U+FB01>c
choice set of a family, making it another factor to be included.
Household income and car ownership are the two main factors
to be considered in this respect (Pont et al., 2009; Roya et al.,
2012). The higher monthly income and car ownership could lead
to a higher dependence on car use among children.
The number of a child’s siblings is another factor affecting his or
her travel mode. Children with more siblings are found to depend

model of modal choice among children.
less on cars and siblings often play the role of these children’s companies 
(McDonald, 2008b). The main reason for this is that the
more children are going to school, the more dif<U+FB01>cult it will be for
parents to send their children to distant schools individually
(Van Goeverden and Boer, 2013).
In recent years, the spatial and temporal constrains of parents’
employment have been increasingly considered (McDonald,
2008b; McDonald and Aalborg, 2009; Pooley et al., 2005; Wen
et al., 2008; He, 2013). For dual-worker couples with children, it
will be more in<U+FB02>exible to arrange joint trips and the children are
more likely to travel by themselves without cars (He, 2013). But
another research found that mothers commuting to work in the
morning thought it is relatively less time-consuming and more
convenient to drive their children to school (McDonald, 2008b).
As a result, their children would have a higher level of car use.

3.3. Surrounding environment level

Some studies have provided evidence of school accessibility
being a very important factor (Beck and Greenspan, 2007;
Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008; Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Pont et al.,
2009). A study by Nelson reported that long travel distance is a signi<U+FB01>cant 
barrier to active commuting for children. The distance of
2.5 miles was found to be a reasonable distance for adolescents
to walk or ride a bicycle (Nelson et al., 2008). McDonald found that
encouraging schools to be located near residential areas will
encourage walking among children in the US (McDonald, 2008a).
An ascending number of researches devoted their attention to
both built environment and the perceptive environment. The built
environment, such as urban form, is more often discussed (Boarnet
et al., 2005; Kerr et al., 2006; McMillan, 2005). Urban form can act
on factors such as neighbourhood safety (real and perceived), traf<U+FB01>c 
safety (real and perceived) and household options. These mediating 
factors may be moderated by other variables, such as social
and cultural norms, parental attitudes and demographic elements,
before the <U+FB01>nal decision of parents. There is a consensus that with
improved traf<U+FB01>c infrastructure projects, such as footpaths, traf<U+FB01>c
lights, pedestrian crossings and bicycle paths, children are more
likely to commute to school on foot or by bicycle, which proves
that the Safe Route to School programme in the United States is
effective (Boarnet et al., 2005). Moreover, more sprawling cities

(Mitra et al., 2010; Loo and Lam, 2013) might discourage more children 
from walking or cycling to school. Apart from these factors,
the real social environment should also be emphasized.
Communities with lower crime rates (McDonald, 2012) and higher
social cohesion (McDonald et al., 2010) may encourage more students 
to commute by walking and cycling.
Further research on the surrounding environment has also been
extended to the notion of the perceived environment, and is even
considered by some to be more important than the real environment 
(McMillan, 2007; Kerr et al., 2006; Lang et al., 2011;
McDonald, 2010). McMillan, for example, describes how the real
surrounding environment is translated into parents’ perceptions
(McMillan, 2007).
Some researchers have found that the local geographical and
cultural contexts also affect children’s mode choice for school trips.
For example, the bicycle is prevalent in the Netherlands and
Flanders in Belgium (Van Goeverden and Boer, 2013). This can be
explained by the highly developed facilities for cycling in the two
countries, unlike the US and other European countries. In addition,
the travel distances for children in the former two countries are
relatively short. The relatively undeveloped bus transport system
in the two countries may also contribute to mode choice (Boer,
2010). Case studies such as this can help us gain a more comprehensive 
understanding of travel behaviour in the Western world.

3.4. Policy level

Some studies are focused on how the planning and transportation 
policies affect children’s modal choice for their journal to
school. School planning policy is often considered to play an
important role in school accessibility, and thus modal choice. For
example, McDonald (2008a) argued that school planning policies
designed to achieve smart growth goals should also take distance
from school to home into account. In particular, providing children
with the opportunity to study in their local community school is a
very important factor in reducing children’s travel distances if the
community density is high enough. Another study reveals that
school consolidation policy could alter the students’ travel mode
and affect their school performance (Talen, 2001). As for the transportation
policies, Safe Route to School in the US has often been
discussed (e.g. Boarnet et al., 2005; McDonald and Aalborg,
2009). Although a consensus on the policy is absent, most
researchers believe that policies like this are necessary to improve
the active transportation among children. A recent study in UK
found that the demand responsive transport service was the most
important determinant to explain the travel pattern change among
a group of students, and students living outside the service space
may be excluded (Kamruzzaman et al., 2011). This is a solution
to Lucas’ (2003) concern about the deprivation of studying opportunities 
as a result of poor transport, but the sequent born
excluded groups needs more attention.

3.5. Related studies in Asia

As for the research areas, the existing researches focus on the
modal choices in the Western world and researches on travel behaviour 
among children in Asia are relatively rare. Some studies have
reported an increasing trend in obesity and car use, for example in
Tehran, Iran (Roya et al., 2012). Nevertheless, researches providing
new perspectives on travel behaviour are relatively rare. A study in
India (Dave et al., 2013) was conducted with the aim of developing
more comfortable, safe and equitable transport in India. In Loo’s
study (Loo and Lam, 2013), accessible school opportunities were
evaluated as an indicator of more equal school distribution, taking
one of the compact cities in China, Hong Kong, as an example. This
study has in<U+FB02>uenced later studies in mainland China, where an

equitable provision of education has been stated to be highly signi<U+FB01>cant, 
and where the population in large cities is extremely concentrated 
and unevenly distributed.
Travel behaviour among children has been ignored by researchers 
in mainland China for a long time. The few studies that have
been done were conducted in the medical <U+FB01>eld, concerning health.
Chinese children have been found to be unique among children in
developing countries because they do not perform chores at home.
Interestingly, compared to developed countries, children in China
use bicycles or walking as the most common ways of commuting
to school (Tudor-Locke et al., 2003). Another study has shown that
active travel is common among children in Jiangsu Province and
bicycle riding is the most common mode (Shi et al., 2006), in contrast 
to the Western world. However, not a single study has been
conducted to determine the reasons underlying this relatively
active behaviour in mainland China. This study attempts to <U+FB01>ll
the gap by investigating modal split among children and its determinants 
in China, using Beijing as a case study.

4. The city background and method

4.1. The city context

Beijing was chosen as an example for this study owing to its
perfect re<U+FB02>ection of the institutional and cultural dimensions of
China. These factors are important in providing new evidence
and a greater understanding of modal choices among children in
mainland China.
The <U+FB01>rst important factor to consider is housing reform and its
implications for the structure of the living environment in Beijing.
Housing reform in China generated a new wave of movement from
the central part of the city to fringe areas in Beijing (Li, 2004; Wang
and Chai, 2009; Zhao et al., 2011) and the lag in infrastructure
development has created many single-function living centres (Liu
et al., 2009), consistent with the <U+FB01>ndings of poor accessibility to
low-density public facilities as a result of urban sprawl in the US
(Ewing, 2008). In the process of rapid urbanization, the uneven distribution 
of public infrastructure on the urban fringe of Beijing has
made spatial inequity more severe (Gu and Shen, 2003; Zhao,
2013b). People living far from their work place will require longer
travel times and may depend more on cars (Yang, 2006; Zhao et al.,
2011). Generally speaking, housing reform has driven inhabitants
outwards. With the best schools concentrated in the inner urban
area and the educational centre in Haidian District, the availability
of motorized vehicles (e.g. car, public transport) may determine to
a large extent the potential schools that children can choose.
The second factor is the special education policies relating to
school entrance in Beijing. This paper looks at students entering
junior secondary school (year 7 to year 9) as an example. The principle 
rule applied to determine which junior secondary school a
child goes to in Beijing is designed to ensure access to the nearest
school (BMCE, 1996). This is done by computer allocation based on
a student’s residential location. However, various educational policies 
also offer pupils the opportunity to avoid their assigned school
and choose a better school. The imbalanced spatial distribution of
junior secondary schools of different quality also makes the policy’s 
initial aim even more unachievable. Many parents are reluctant 
to accept the result of computer allocation, and their desire
to ensure a better education for their children leads them to make
use of the present policies rather than purchase expensive houses
in the right zones.
For example, students can gain entrance to schools with a high
reputation by attending assigned cramming schools and passing
exams (zhankengban), or through a special talent (e.g. in playing
a musical instrument, or playing sport; techangsheng). Moreover
children of parents from certain national corporations and administrative 
sectors can enter directly into speci<U+FB01>c secondary schools
(gongjiansheng). Parents can also pay entrance fees to obtain a
place for their child in a key junior secondary school (jiedusheng)
(21st Century Education Research Institute, 2011). A recent report
found that the number of pupils entering junior secondary schools
in a district different from the one recorded on his or her hukou
amounted to 136,000, equivalent to 14.4% of the pupils with
Beijing hukou (BAES, 2009). Diverse education policies and speci<U+FB01>c
institutional characteristics in the transition period in China has
meant that the automatic allocation policy has failed and many
pupils enter better quality junior secondary schools through various 
means, while the others have no choice but to attend the allocated 
school.
The third and related factor is the hukou system itself, which
can make social exclusion even worse. In Beijing, children without
Beijing hukou are treated differently to those who have Beijing
hukou. These children’s parents are usually migrants from rural
areas or members of the young middle-income groups working
in the private sector, called ‘white collars’. It is normal for the children 
of the former to enter junior secondary schools designated for
them because of the dif<U+FB01>culty in processing required permits (e.g.
living permit, working permit, etc.). For the latter, a large number
do not yet have children. By the time their children are ready for
junior secondary school, many of them will have moved into a
higher socioeconomic group. The only problem might be longer

school travel distances.
The unique household culture of China may also be a contributing 
factor. Many consider that China’s one-child policy has led to a
spoiled generation, given superior material resources (Settles et al.,
2013). In a more competitive era, children are also expected to perform 
well academically to guarantee their future success (Man,
1993), and today parents devote much of their leisure time and
money to their child’s education (Chen, 1986; Fong, 2002).
School quality is thus given more value due to the competitive
social environment and the high expectations of families, while
home–school distance and transport to school are considered less
important. As a result, many parents adjust their life patterns to
provide better education for their children in many ways, such as
renting houses near schools and, of course, chauffeuring their children
to and from school.

4.2. Data and study area

The original study dataset come from the Third Travel Survey of
Beijing Inhabitants (TS 2005), conducted by the Beijing Municipal
Committee of Transport and Capital Planning Committee. TS
2005 includes 832,451 one-day travel activities reported by
208,290 inhabitants from 81,698 households, living in the 18 districts 
of Beijing. The total sample of TS 2005 is 1.5% of the population 
of Beijing, including those without hukou. In the survey, the
members of the households selected were asked about their trip
patterns on one day. In addition to travel information, such as travel 
distance, travel time, travel origin and destination, as well as
travel modes, interviewees were also asked about related household 
characteristics, including the characteristics of all of its members, 
income, car ownership, and characteristics of the housing.
For the present research, the Core District of Capital Function
(the city centre and the most urbanized area of Beijing, including
Dongcheng District, Xicheng District, Chongwen District and
Xuanwu District, for the core area below)1 and the Urban
Function Extended Districts (the peripheral suburb of Beijing,

including Chaoyang District, Fengtai District, Shijingshan District
and Haidian District, for the function extended area below)
(BMCDR, 2006) were chosen as the areas of study (see Fig. 2).
Junior secondary school students aged 13–15 years old (junior secondary 
group de<U+FB01>ned by NBS, 2013) living in the study areas were
selected, with the sample number of the <U+FB01>nal dataset 3267.

4.3. Method

Logit and nested-logit models are usually used in studies of
modal choices among children. Nested-logit models are applicable
when examining modal choices categorized into two types, such as
independent and dependent travel behaviour (Lin and Chang,
2010). As mentioned above, the target group is junior secondary
school students studying in Beijing, who are able to travel independently 
(Matthews, 1992). Therefore, the logit model was used in
the study to uncover the relationship between school-housing distance 
and travel modal choices among children (Train, 2003).
The model assumes that the parents in a household n, choose
the travel mode j for their children as a comprehensive consideration 
according to the surrounding environment, the SES of the
household and the demographic characteristics of their children
to achieve the maximum utility Unj. The probability of choosing
the mode j is:

under the constraint condition; U nj ¼ V nj þ enj ;

where enj is the error term distributed iid (independently and identically 
distribute).

5. Analysis

5.1. School accessibility and modal split

This section provides information about school accessibility and
modal split among children living in Beijing. The information may
offer some suggestions for deeper analysis in the following section.
All of the variables in the model are based on both a theoretical
and empirical basis (see Section 2). As for the surrounding environment, 
the information about the built environment (e.g. population
density, land use mix) should be considered at a micro level.
However, it is impossible for the survey to include the scope of
the entire city. Therefore, the location of the neighbourhood is
measured by a dummy variable – whether it is in the core area
of capital function or not – used to capture the heterogeneity of
the surrounding environment on a crude scale.
Table 1 indicates that more than 50% of the respondents living
in a core area go to schools within 2 km of their home. This is more
than ten percent higher than their counterparts living in function
extended areas. Notably, more than one quarter of students living
in a function extended area travel more than 5 km to school. It is
conspicuous that the junior secondary school distribution in the
function extended area is more scattered than in the core area of
capital function.
Table 1 also shows modal distribution for children living in different 
areas by travel distances. It illustrates that bicycle is the
most important travel mode for both the function extended area
and the core area. This <U+FB01>nding is consistent with the results in
the Netherlands (Van Goeverden and Boer, 2013). It also re<U+FB02>ects
the use of the bicycle by the general population in Beijing (Zhao,
2013b). Respondents tend to walk when the home-to-school distance 
is less than 1 km and bicycle is preferred when the travel distance 
is a little longer, especially between 1 and 3 km. If travel
       
distance is longer than 3 km, public transport and car are used
more, while bicycle use dramatically declines. In the core area,
the bicycle is preferred more when the travel distance is shorter
than 3 km, especially for students whose schools are located
within 1 km of their homes. When the travel distance is longer
than 3 km, public transport is used more than the car. However,
it is apparent that trips taken by car by students living in the
extended area are more usual compared with the core area. This
echoes studies of Beijing that demonstrate that urban sprawl contributes 
to longer travel distances and a higher rate of car use
(Yang, 2006; Zhao et al., 2011). If higher car use is signi<U+FB01>cantly
related to car ownership and income, it is possible that students
in low-income households might be excluded from better education 
resources as a consequence of limited transport resources,
one determinant of school accessibility. Moreover, even when the
travel distance reaches 5 km, there is still a proportion of students
who use a bicycle to commute to school. A summary of other variables 
is provided in Table 2. The data shown in the chart are consistent 
with <U+FB01>ndings on the general situation in Beijing.

5.2. Regression results

The data description above shows that modal split among children 
living within 3 km of school and their counterparts differ.

Therefore, respondents are divided into two separate groups. The
mode labelled ‘others’ were excluded from the model. The regression 
results are shown in Tables 3 and 4.
For respondents living within 3 km of school, distance is a significant 
reason for a declining rate of walking, consistent with a study
in the US (McDonald, 2008a). When the travel distance reaches
2 km, there is a signi<U+FB01>cant transfer to public transport. After controlling 
for other variables, the in<U+FB02>uence of age (or school level) and gender 
are signi<U+FB01>cant. Respondents at higher levels of school and boys
in the survey are more inclined to use the bicycle than other travel
modes. The signi<U+FB01>cant effects of income con<U+FB01>rm that low-income
households are more likely to walk rather than use the bicycle,
and children from households with private cars are more likely to
travel to school by car. Moreover, children from households of four
and more people, perhaps households with more than one child,
or with a grandparent, are more likely to walk than three-people
households, when other variables are controlled. If four-people
households in the survey are primarily those with more than one
child, our <U+FB01>ndings are consistent with a study in the US that found
a higher rate of walking to and from school for households with more
siblings (McDonald and Aalborg, 2009). However, due to the higher
numbers of elderly living with nuclear families in China, further
research is needed to determine the precise relationship between
household structure and travel mode choice.

The surrounding environment, presented by the dummy variable 
‘function’, is signi<U+FB01>cant among the groups who walk or take
public transport, but not the bicycle. Children living in a core area
have a tendency towards bicycle use for travel to school rather
than other modes. This implies that in the extended area, the environment 
is not so conducive to cycling, which has been proven in
previous research, which found that less diversity of land use and
worse jobs-housing balance account for less likelihood of cycling in
Beijing (Zhao, 2013a). Hukou is not signi<U+FB01>cant after controlling for
other variables. The regression results for children who need to travel 
longer than 3 km are shown in Table 4.
For distance variables, there is a signi<U+FB01>cant modal split across
the different groups. A longer distance contributes to a higher
rate of use of motorized vehicles. Age is insigni<U+FB01>cant as a determinant 
of modal split. Boys are more likely to cycle to school
than girls. Hukou, monthly income, car ownership and household
structure all act signi<U+FB01>cantly on the modal split between public
transport and car. Children from high-income households or
households with private cars are more likely to travel by car
than public transport. Interestingly, children from households
with two people, in most cases de<U+FB01>ned as ‘single-parent

households’, are more likely to travel to school by car. As for
hukou status, students without hukou are more likely to go to
school by public transport.
The regression results in Table 4 concerning household characteristics 
are more signi<U+FB01>cant compared to those in Table 3. This
suggests that the effect of household characteristics on modal split
grows as the distance from home-to-school increases. For children
travelling more than 3 km from home to school and living in the
function extended area, the car is more likely to be used (compared
to public transport) than it is by those living in the core area, similar 
to the <U+FB01>nding in Table 4. It is clear that the presentation of
modal split for different distance groups is distinctly diverse. For
the group within 3 km, 2 km is an important turning point, before
which we <U+FB01>nd a split between bicycle and walking, and after which
a signi<U+FB01>cant increase in use of motorized vehicles is observable. By
contrast, the other group tells us a different story, where the focus
is a split between car and public transport use, which is related
more to socioeconomic and institutional (e.g. hukou) variables.
For both distance groups, it is worth discussing how we might
achieve a more inclusive society for children, from the perspective
of modal split.

6. Discussion and policy implications

By taking various aspects of the variables into account, the
study shed light on modal split among junior secondary school students 
in Beijing with a mixed institutional and cultural context.
With respect to children living within 3 km of school, we found
that children from low-income families are more likely to walk,
indicating a disadvantageous environment for bicycling to some
extent. As for their counterparts, children from households with
higher socioeconomic status, with private cars and Beijing hukou
are more likely to travel by car, a re<U+FB02>ection of a different level of
school accessibility. Both groups demonstrate social exclusion.
Various educational policies allow junior secondary school students 
some degree of choice of school. However, these opportunities 
are limited, which may contribute to <U+FB01>erce competition among
children. The uneven distribution of key junior secondary schools
means children living in the function extended area suffer from
higher travel costs. For children coming from low-income households, 
transport accessibility can be a major barrier to better education. 
This is partly supported by an empirical study of a voucher
policy in the city of Milwaukee in the US aimed at encouraging
children from low-income households to enter private schools.
The study found that 8% of the households refused the opportunity
because of problems related to the accessibility of the schools
(Peterson et al., 2002).
Above <U+FB01>ndings suggest there be at least two ways of improving
children’s school accessibility. One could be to increase the number
of schools across different function areas in Beijing, taking school
quality into account. In addition, the policy of allowing students
to enter junior secondary school by special means may in fact be
a way of excluding those who cannot afford the expensive fees
and transport costs. One possible outcome is that students from
lower socioeconomic backgrounds are constrained to attend
schools close to their home, while those from high-income households 
have more freedom to attend schools with better resources,

regardless of the high costs of travel, in terms of time and money.
In other words, only those from households with a higher socioeconomic 
status have the opportunity to enter key schools. This
has been called the ‘cream-skimming effect’ of private schools in
the US (Fuller and Elmore, 1996). This effect, partly related to the
unequal distribution of transport resources, should be considered
more closely, both by policymakers and researchers, to better
understand how it generates a potential sorting effect according
to the socioeconomic status of students.
The other may be to enhance transport services for children.
This study shows that transportation planning should take children’s 
special needs into consideration if possible. In particularly,
it is essential to note that public transport should be improved.
As analyzed previously, the underdevelopment of public transport
services can partly account for the increasing use of cars by children 
in the function extended area. Unlike the US, and some
European countries such as the Netherlands, whose public transport 
systems are undeveloped for various reasons, Beijing should
depend more on public transportation to handle traf<U+FB01>c congestion
and traf<U+FB01>c pollution in the long term as a compact city. Therefore,
it is of vital importance to provide various public transportation
facilities in the function extended area, which can greatly contribute 
to real school distribution equity across different groups
of students, expanding their school options, especially for those
from low-income households.
Car ownership is another issue. Although it is important to
encourage public transit-oriented development in Beijing as a
preferable transport mode in the future, there is no doubt that
access to a private car can increase the travel scope of children
and expand their school choices, especially in the present situation,
where public transport is relatively poor in the function extended
area. Without a car, especially in areas where transport accessibility 
is poor, children face big obstacles to a better education. In this
respect, it is important that residents without Beijing hukou should
have the right to have a car licence. Future urban planning and

school planning should avoid the concurrent existence of spatial
segregation and socioeconomic segregation, which has been found
in other research (Zhao, 2013b).
Finally, it is worth noting that even for shorter travel distances
the bicycle is used less in the function extended area. The <U+FB01>ndings
in this study show that the surrounding environment – a crude
compound of many variables such as population density, road <U+FB02>atness 
and jobs-housing imbalance – in the function extended area
discourages children from cycling, echoing the <U+FB01>ndings of Zhao
(Zhao, 2013a). Notably, it is very important to advocate cycling
as one of the effective means to sustain an environmentally
friendly transport system in Beijing.

7. Conclusions

This study found that the speci<U+FB01>c institutional and cultural context 
in Beijing is an important determinant of school accessibility
and modal split for junior secondary school students. Students
are travelling longer distances as a result of housing reform and
the uneven distribution of key schools, especially students living
in the function extended area. For the group with travel distances
of less than 3 km, 2 km is a transitional point and the bicycle is the
most used mode. In circumstances where travel distances are
longer than 3 km, public transport use increases. Relatively active
travel behaviour is found among junior secondary school students
in China. Notably, car use in Beijing for the trip to school is significantly 
related to household characteristics, which is a re<U+FB02>ection of
modal split. Moreover, the variation in bicycle use across different
function areas is also signi<U+FB01>cant.
For the group travelling further than 3 km, discussion should
focus on the determinants of public transport and car use. There
is a conspicuous split between these two modes dependent on
the socioeconomic status of a household. Children with Beijing
hukou, from high-income households and with private cars are
more likely to travel to school by car. Moreover, although the rate
of car use among children for longer travel distances is higher in
the function extended area, children living there depend more on
public transport. The results of two logit regression models show
that modal split across different social groups is more evident in
this group with a greater school–home distance.
Further research is needed to <U+FB01>ll the following gaps. Firstly, travel 
behaviour should be considered in relation to more educational
factors, such as school choice, school quality and the spatial distribution 
of educational opportunities, to determine the level of mismatch 
between home and schooling. Secondly, the internal links
between travel distance, travel time, transport accessibility, school
accessibility and school achievement should be further explored
through the development of a speci<U+FB01>c model that can assist us to
better understand the modal split and distance sorting to improve
social inclusion.