How short-term cycling training promotes cycling among schoolchildren in high-
density cities

ABSTRACT                     
                                                                                   
This study explores how short-term, school-based cycling training programs can promote cycling                     
among schoolchildren in the high-density city of Hong Kong. The schoolchildren’s progression in                        
cycling ability was monitored closely by professional cycling coaches. Fifty-two children (aged                    
8–17) at three schools participated. Before and after data on their cycling habits and perceptions
of the children and their parents were collected. Children showed clear improvements in their                        
cycling techniques and skills with each session of the cycling training. After the children’s training,           
parents readily felt that cycling training helped to protect cyclists’ safety, with three quarters of           
“yes” respondents, and children were in agreement to a lesser magnitude, at around 55%. Other                  
perceptions of cycling and cycling training were explored as well, with varying results. 24% of chil-
dren reported cycling more after training, the majority of those at the introductory level, who had
hardly ever cycled prior to training. The results suggest that cycling training has improved school-
children’s cycling ability, while perceptions and habits of cycling have begun to change as well.
These findings can inform future policy direction in the implementation of formalized cycling
training for schools situated in high-density cities like Hong Kong primarily to promote cycling for
recreation and further as a form of sustainable transport. This needs to go hand in hand with
improving neighborhood environments so they become more amenable for active travel especially
for vulnerable road users, such as child cyclists.

1. Introduction and review                                                         
											
High-density cities are becoming more common in an
										
increasingly urbanized world, and their compact urban form
										
means that trip distances are more suited to active travel                         
behavior like walking and cycling (De Vos et al., 2019; Lau                        
et al., 2005; Leung et al., 2019). However, even with these                        
self-evident opportunities to go about journeys on foot or                         
by bicycle, dense urban agglomerations still present many                          
barriers that discourage active travel, especially in highly                       
motorized environments, not least for vulnerable road users                        
like children. First, there are perceptions of hazardous traf-                     
fic, poor neighborhood environment and social danger                               
(Salmon et al., 2007; Willis et al., 2015); then, there are                        
other external barriers, such as poor public transport facili-                     
ties and steep topography (Timperio et al., 2004; Trapp                            
et al., 2011). However, physical activity is highly important                      
for children’s physiological (Armstrong, 1993; Hills et al.,                       
2007) and psychological (Ramanathan et al., 2014; Waygood                          
et al., 2019) wellbeing, and it is clearly in the best interests                   
of children and society at large for these barriers to be                          
hurdled and for physical activity, including active travel, to                     
be further promoted.                                                               
One method to promote more physical activity in chil-                          
dren is through the introduction of school-based cycling                           

training programs. Safety concerns related to cycling
crash-related traffic injuries has emerged as a common
theme in recent literature (Boufous et al., 2011; Loo &
Tsui, 2010; Papadakaki et al., 2018; Robartes & Chen,
2018; Sze et al., 2011), especially single bicycle crashes
(see Schepers et al., 2015), so helping children with their
cycling ability for them to be more able to navigate haz-
ardous environments and situations appears to be one
way to address parents’ worries. With this improvement
in children’s cycling ability and alleviation of parental
concerns, it would be reasonable to expect that cycling
frequency can increase. A review of cycling training ini-
tiatives in recent literature is presented in Section 1.1, to
better understand the effectiveness of skills training pro-
grams around the world in improving cycling ability,
confidence and safety perceptions, and whether this
ultimately culminates in increased frequency of cycling.
Section 1.2 provides an overview of cycling as a sustain-
able transport mode in Hong Kong and the relevant
social and cultural context. Section 1.3 presents a concep-
tual framework for better understanding the efficacy of
cycling training programs in the promotion of cycling
among schoolchildren. The study objectives are also
explained with close reference to the conceptual frame-
work in this section.

1.1. Review of cycling training initiatives

Cycling training generally refers to training programs that
help to improve participants’ ability and confidence to cycle,
which may include different training levels from the most
basic training in a traffic-free environment, to more
advanced training on roads (Ducheyne et al., 2013a). There
have been various local and national initiatives (e.g. Meester
op de fiets, n.d.; Bikeability, 2013; Cycle for Health, 2011;
Wellington City Council, 2012), as well as smaller scale
interventions (Lehtonen et al., 2017; Schutzhofer et al., 2017;
Twisk et al., 2014, 2018; Vansteenkiste et al., 2016; Zeuwts
et al., 2016; Zeuwts et al., 2017). The effectiveness of cycling
training has been widely discussed in the literature, mostly
Western-centric in context. Previous studies demonstrated
that cycling training (i) improves children’s cycling know-
ledge and self-perceived confidence of cycling, (ii) increases
frequency of cycling to school in boys, (iii) is largely viewed
as beneficial by parents and (iv) has many advantages that
are beneficial to adolescents in keeping them safe from traf-
fic (Mandic et al., 2016, 2017, 2018a, 2018b). Trained cyclists
also have safer cycling behavior than their counterparts
without training (Savill et al., 1996; Telfer et al., 2006).
Parents would consider their children to be able to cycle
safely after participation in cycling training (The Royal
Society for the Prevention of Accidents, 2001; Spence, 2003).
In contrast, however, some studies indicate that cycling
training programs would neither improve safe cycling
behavior nor change adolescents’ attitudes towards cycling
(Macarthur et al., 1998), and also fail to increase children’s
frequency of cycling (Goodman et al., 2016) and cycling to
school (Ducheyne et al., 2014). Evidently, with the variety of
cycling training programs being studied, in terms of pro-
gram duration, target group, training scheme, surrounding
environment, etc., it is difficult to definitively compare their
efficacy in promoting cycling among children. Sersli et al.
(2019) also came to the same conclusion in their recent
review of studies on cycling training, and noted that future
research should (i) present a conceptual framework to
understand the processes at work, (ii) divulge in the study
context in terms of location, target group, policy back-
ground, etc. and (iii) provide more precise details about the
training content. With more details about the concept, con-
text and content of cycling training programs, research in
this area may begin to progress and be able to inform prac-
titioners on how best to implement training programs that
are able in terms of cycling skills, change attitudes and
ultimately increase cycling frequency.


1.2. Cycling as a sustainable transport mode in
Hong Kong

Hong Kong, as a highly motorized city (Yao & Loo, 2016),
has a very low modal share of cycling—around 0.5% of total
trips [Legislative Council Panel on Transport, 2010]. Cycling
is considered as merely recreational in nature (Loo & Tsui,
2010), and it would be unreasonable to expect this to change
in the short-term. Geographically, 97% of daily cycle trips
were in the New Territories (Transport Department, 2004),

which is mainly rural with several medium-density new
town developments. Safety concerns have long been one
major barrier against promoting cycling as a transport mode
in Hong Kong. Especially in Hong Kong’s urban areas
where there are few cyclists, the safety-in-number benefits
do not apply unlike in European countries such Germany or
the Netherlands, where the substantial travel mode share of
cyclists enables safer cycling experiences (Pucher & Dijkstra,
2003; Yao & Loo, 2016).
The lack of sufficient safe cycling infrastructure, mixed
traffic and insufficient training for cyclists are contributory
factors for bicycle crashes in Hong Kong (Loo & Tsui,
2010). Hong Kong traffic accident data from 1996 to 2015
managed by the Transport Department (2015) showed that
cycling casualties (i.e. injuries at all levels and fatalities) in
Hong Kong have quadrupled over the past two decades,
from 541 in 1996 to 2,395 in 2015, with the casualty rate
per 100,000 population rising from 8.41 in 1996 to around
33 since 2011, and holding relatively stable since. This figure
matches the UK’s casualty rate per 100,000 population, also
at 33 (The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents,
2016). However, bicycle mode share in England, at 1.9%, is
nearly quadruple Hong Kong’s (Department for Transport,
2016). This suggests that the risk of cycling in Hong Kong
(risk ¼ casualty/exposure) is much higher, though there are
no systematic risk exposure figures about cyclists and pedes-
trians in Hong Kong and most other cities (Yao et al.,
2015). The casualty rate for Hong Kong’s cyclists aged
14 years and under have increased from 24.5 in 2009 to 35.6
in 2015, per 100,000 population, and 15 of these child
cyclists have died since 1996, highlighting the importance of
studying child cyclists in Hong Kong.
Furthermore, there are specific cultural and environmen-
tal considerations specific to the East Asian context, which
may also contribute to explaining the low prevalence of
cycling. Culturally, Chinese parents are very protective of
their children (Lim, 2012), and believe it would be irrespon-
sible even to let children as old as 12 move around the
neighborhood freely without adult supervision (Karsten,
2015; Lam & Loo, 2014). This mindset is in great contrast
with Hong Kong parents who are expatriates, despite both
Chinese and expatriate parents acknowledging Hong Kong
to be very safe (Karsten, 2015). Hong Kong’s government
recommends all children up until age 11 (i.e. including most
primary school students) to still be supervised when walking
or cycling (Transport Department, 2018), which matches the
Chinese mindset described above. Children’s schedules are
also often packed with many extracurricular activities
throughout a week (The Hong Kong Federation of Youth
Groups, 2017; Leung & Loo, 2017), which means there is
very little unstructured play time where, for example, chil-
dren can go for a cycle in the park. Environmental barriers
need to be accounted for as well. In urban areas, there are
very few cycling facilities, and the central business district
(CBD) areas are either too busy in traffic, too steep and
uneven in topography, or both (Yao & Loo, 2016). Cycle
tracks are more common in the New Territories region, and

they facilitate travel within new towns that have been built                        
on flatter, primarily reclaimed, land (Loo & Tsui, 2010).                           										
											
1.3. Conceptual framework and study objectives    
                                  
Having reviewed cycling training initiatives and discussed                          
the context of cycling in Hong Kong, it is clear amid the                           
numerous challenges, there are opportunities for cycling fre-                       
quency and safety to be increased in these compact, high-                           
density cities. One course of action would be to implement                          
cycling training programs and investigate their efficacy in                         
changing cycling abilities, perceptions and habits, which has                       
never previously been studied in East Asia. Echoing the call                        
by Sersli et al. (2019) for conceptualization of the processes                      
at work in and around cycling training initiatives, Figure 1                        
links up the aforementioned factors in a novel conceptual                           
framework and provides a structure to more comprehen-                               
sively understand cycling training, associated changes in                           
cycling frequency and the processes behind these changes.                           
Each linkage is discussed in this section and further elabo-                        
rated in the sections thereafter.                                                   
The left-middle rectangle represents children’s participa-                      
tion in the cycling training program as an input in the                            
framework. Cycling training has not been systematically                             
introduced in this part of the world (Loo and Tsui, 2010),                          
and even so, only via ad hoc, independently run programs                            
for the public and for a few schools. The dense urban form                          
that is prevalent in these cities, like Hong Kong, differs con-                     
siderably from Western cities, where residential and com-                           
mercial developments are generally lower in density and                             
more spaced out (Lau et al., 2005; Smith, 1984). This makes                         
Hong Kong a highly worthwhile and important study con-                              
text, helping to fill the research gap in the literature by pro-                    
viding an Asian perspective. The rectangle on the top left                          
represents, also as an input, the child and parent socio-                               
demographic characteristics obtained in this study, including                       
age, gender, bicycle ownership, knowledge of how to cycle,                          
purpose and frequency of cycling, independent mobility and                          
transport mode for activities. These variables serve as the                         
basic background information for participants of the cycling                        
training program, and also for analysis of the change in                            

cycling frequency after participation in cycling training,
indicated by the oval on the right (see for example,
Goodman et al., 2016; Mandic et al., 2018b).
The three rounded rectangles in the middle, as processes,
represent cycling ability (child), confidence in the child
cycling (child and parent) and perception of cycling safety
(child and parent), linking from the input rectangle on the
left-middle, i.e. participation in the cycling training program,
and to the outcome oval on the right, i.e. the change in
cycling frequency. The improvement in cycling ability after
participation in a cycling training program is a self-explana-
tory relationship (see for example, Ducheyne et al., 2013a,
2014; Telfer et al., 2006), and often serves as a major aim of
cycling training programs (Goodman et al., 2016). However,
this is not necessarily accompanied by an increase in cycling
frequency (Ducheyne et al., 2014). With regards to confi-
dence in cycling after participating in cycling training,
Mandic et al. (2018a, 2018b) and van Lierop et al. (2016)
found an improvement in confidence to cycle among child
participants. On parental confidence, Spence (2003) notes
that training can improve parental confidence to let their
child to cycle. Meanwhile, Ducheyne et al. (2013b) and
Mandic et al. (2016) both fall short of explicitly examining
how confident parents are after their children’s participation
in the program, although they do explain the significance of
parental confidence in children’s cycling abilities with chil-
dren cycling more. Finally, perceptions of cycling and cycling
training have also been examined in the literature in child
participants of the training programs (Mandic et al., 2016;
van Lierop et al., 2016) and also their parents (Ducheyne
et al., 2014; Mandic et al., 2017; van Lierop et al., 2016), with
somewhat inconclusive results. Researchers have also yet to
study if these changes in perception are associated with
changes in cycling frequency either.
Whether these training programs ultimately change habits
of cycling, especially in Asian cities, is up for debate.
Current cycling education in Hong Kong is very limited,
even at the classroom level, and the focus is on teaching
general rules as a road user, with no actual cycling practice
(The Sun, 2013). General attitudes in Hong Kong towards
cycling remain lukewarm at best. With close reference to the

conceptual framework described above, this study’s aims are
as follows. First, this study evaluates the change in children’s
cycling ability throughout their participation in a short-term
cycling training program, in terms of their techniques (act
of performing a movement) and skills (applying the appro-
priate technique) (British Cycling, 2005) necessary to cycle
safely. Second, the impact of cycling training programs on
child cyclists’ and their parents’ perceptions of cycling are
investigated. It is important to understand perspectives of
children and their parents. Parents have considerable influ-
ence over their child, as their perceptions directly affect their
child’s cycling habits (Ducheyne et al., 2012; Willis et al.,
2015). Finally, this study examines the change (if any) in
cycling habits after training, and explores the differences by
(i) socio-demographic characteristics, (ii) overall self-per-
ceived cycling skills improvement, (iii) post-training confi-
dence ratings and (iv) perceptions of cycling and cycling
training, of children and their parents. These perspectives
are complemented by evaluations of the participating child-
ren’s abilities as assessed by two professional cycling
coaches, underlining this study’s comprehensive and inte-
grated approach.

2. Methodology

In this section, (i) participants and administration of the
study, (ii) the cycling training program intervention, (iii) the
outcome measures and measurement procedures and (iv)
the analysis of data are described.

2.1. Study participants and administration

This article’s focus is on schoolchildren studying at Primary
3 to Primary 6 (8–12 years old) and Secondary 1 to
Secondary 4 (12–17 years old) in selected Hong Kong
schools, who participated in school-based cycling training
programs developed for this study. For continuity, these par-
ticipants are referred to as “children” throughout this article,
encompassing all non-adult participants (i.e. under 18 years
of age), while noting well that part of the sample would be
better described as “adolescents”. The youngest age group
joining the cycling training, at 8–9 years old, fit the sug-
gested targeted groups for participation in the UK’s
Bikeability initiative (Bikeability, 2013).
This study was aimed at schools in Hong Kong’s New
Territories, where cycling infrastructure is more abundant
and the terrain is flatter. Invitation letters were sent to all
schools in the New Territories (518 in total) and three schools
in the region agreed to participate in this study. In Hong
Kong, most cycling trips were recorded in the New Territories

(Loo & Chow, 2008), which explains the attractive proposition
of cycling training programs for schools situated there, as
there is better provision and planning of cycling infrastructure
in the New Territories. Government-maintained bicycle tracks
exist close to all three schools. After confirmation of the
schools, child participants were recruited voluntarily from
each school, and parental consent was obtained for participa-
tion. No financial incentives were given to schools, children
or their parents for participation. Cycling training programs
were conducted from June 2015 to May 2016, with training
sessions arranged around busy school calendars and timeta-
bles typical of Hong Kong schools. All children and their
parents were asked to complete before-and-after question-
naire surveys. Of the 52 children who participated in the
cycling training programs, 33 full sets of questionnaire surveys
were completed and usable for analysis.

2.2. Cycling training program intervention

The central focus of this study is a cycling training program
for children at two different levels of cycling ability, fully
accounting for safety issues and local context in Hong Kong:
participants at no point in the training program cycled on
the road, due to heavy vehicular traffic typical of Hong
Kong. All cycling training programs were organized by the
two professional cycling coaches free of charge, which sets
this study apart from others where cycling training for chil-
dren is usually provided by school teachers in physical edu-
cation (PE) class (Sersli et al., 2019). Before training,
children reported whether they could cycle or not and were
placed into the “introductory” (Group 1) and “advanced”

(Group 2) groups as appropriate.
Tailored programs based on the abilities of children in
the group were developed by the coaches, consisting of three
90-min sessions spaced out over one month (scheduled at
one session per week, but accounting for unforeseen circum-
stances such as inclement weather). Group 1 is introductory
in nature and incorporates the most basic of Bikeability’s
first level learning outcomes, namely to (i) prepare bicycle
and own self for cycling, (ii) get on and off bicycle without
help and to (iii) control bicycle while starting off, pedaling
and stopping (Bikeability, 2013). It is designed for novices
who are just learning to ride the bicycle, and spends all
three lessons going through these first level learning out-
comes. Group 2 is more advanced and includes all of
Bikeability’s first level learning outcomes, including the
abovementioned three covered in the first lesson, plus (i)
use appropriate gears and avoid obstacles and (ii) look all
around and behind and keep in balance, which were covered
in the second lesson. Some second level outcomes were also

incorporated, namely to (i) recognize typical traffic hazards
and (ii) let other road users know of own presence, adapted
to fit trainees who already have a basic ability of cycling on
bicycle tracks in Hong Kong. These items were covered in
the third lesson, and children had the opportunity to handle
a live traffic environment on cycle tracks. For Group 2, the
coaches evaluated each child’s cycling ability along the first
level and applicable portions of the second level of the UK’s
National Standard learning outcomes for cycling
(Bikeability, 2013). Each lesson for the Group 2 participants
had specific targeted aims and content, as shown in Table 1,
derived with close reference to the Bikeability learn-
ing outcomes.

2.3. Measurement procedures

For Group 1, the cycling coaches evaluated every child’s
ability to attain the learning outcomes before the first lesson,
denoted as either “yes, able” or “no, unable”. The partici-
pants were then taught the correct method for performing
the techniques over the course of the three lessons, and at
the end of the third lesson, they were assessed again on the
same items. The process was the same for Group 2, except
there were new targeted aims and content in each of the
three lessons, and the coaches’ assessments were made
before and after each lesson.
Children (with teacher assistance as necessary) and their
parents (self-administered) completed questionnaire surveys
before the start of the training program and approximately
four weeks after the program’s completion. The question-
naires were developed with close reference to professional
knowledge and advice from the cycling coaches. The ques-
tionnaire obtained perceptions of the techniques, skills and
knowledge taught during the cycling training program.
Respondents were also asked about other perceptions of
cycling, including whether cyclists are a road hazard, the
efficacy of cycling training programs in protecting the safety
of cyclists and other road users, and also the self-perceived
gain(s) of participating in cycling training. Confidence rat-
ings for the child cycling in different scenarios were given
by both the children themselves and their parents. The
change in cycling frequency after the completion of training
was also collected. Socio-demographic characteristics and
relevant travel behavior was collected before training. The

details of the questionnaire items and response categories
are provided in Table 2.

2.4. Analysis of data

Given the sample size and exploratory nature of this study,
the data analysis method for illustrating the results of the
children’s progression in the cycling training programs is
primarily descriptive. The number of participants who had
attained each assessed item was totaled and translated into a
percentage for presentation in a table (as shown in the next
section). Regarding the questionnaires, demographic charac-
teristics and baseline data were analyzed using descriptive
statistics. Crosstabs were used to gain an overview of the
differences in categorical variables between groups, and
these differences were further examined using the binomial
test and Pearson’s chi-squared test. These two tests have had
wide applications in the transportation and activity-travel
behavior literature (de Geus et al., 2008; Gamberini et al.,
2013; Hadayeghi et al., 2007; Harms & Brookhuis, 2016).
Differences in continuous variables between groups were
compared using independent samples t-tests and
Mann–Whitney U-tests, accounting for skewness (within
±2), excess kurtosis (within ±2) and Levene’s test statistics
(p>.05) in determining whether variables were parametric
and of equal variance (McCrum-Gardner, 2008).

3. Results

In this section, the evaluation of children’s performance and
progression throughout the cycling training program by the
professional coaches is described for the 31 primary school
and 21 secondary school participants (32 boys and 20 girls).
This is followed by results from the questionnaire survey for
11 and 22 child–parent, before-after matched-pairs for
Groups 1 and 2 respectively, including descriptions of (i)
basic characteristics of the sample, (ii) how children and
their parents perceive cycling and cycling training and (iii)
whether cycling habits have changed after cycling training
and the relevant factors associated with these changes.

3.1. Professional cycling coaches’ evaluation of children
participating in the cycling training

This section summarizes the professional cycling coaches’
evaluation of each participant’s cycling ability throughout
the training programs. After the three sessions for Group 1
participants, 85% of the children achieved the training goals
for novices, namely to (i) to perform a bike check, and (ii)
to start, ride in balance and stop on a bicycle. The cycling
coaches had an opportunity during the final session to
supervise these novice-level children to go out on cycle
tracks to experience what cycling is like outside of the
school playground. This was not part of the
coaches’ assessment.
For Group 2, there were more training goals to achieve.
Even in Group 2, many children were unable to start off
properly, though many of them could stay in balance and
keep going after starting off. After the first lesson, proper
starting off was achieved by most participants. The more
advanced cycling techniques such as rounding corners and
riding single-handed taught in the second lesson were only
attained by around two thirds of the trainees. In the third
lesson, where children had the opportunity to go out on
cycle tracks and ride inside the school’s neighborhood,
proper bicycle positioning on the cycle track was weak at
the start, but this improved considerably after the 90-minute
supervised session. The attainment of training goals before
and after each lesson for Group 2 participants is shown in
Table 3.
The findings here clearly illustrate the efficacy of this
cycling training program in improving cycling techniques
and skills, in line with Ducheyne et al. (2013a, 2014) and
Telfer et al. (2006). This validates the linkage in the concep-
tual framework between participation in cycling training and
the improvement in cycling ability, fulfilling the first aim of
this study.

3.2. Description of questionnaire survey respondents

Descriptive statistics of the questionnaire survey respondents
are shown in Table 4. The sample shows a sizeable divide
between Group 1 and Group 2 of the cycling training pro-
gram, whether for the children themselves, or their parents.
More Group 2 participants were boys, owned a bicycle
themselves, had greater independent mobility in going out
alone and cycled more frequently, compared to Group 1.
Cycling purpose of Group 2 participants was generally for
fun and play, and they were also more active in terms of
their travel to school, though none in either group reported
their primary travel mode to school as cycling. Parents who
answered the parent questionnaire of Group 2 participants
were more likely to be the father, own a bicycle, know how
to cycle and cycle more frequently, in comparison with
parents of the novices. No parent cycled more than once a
week overall, and cycling purpose was primarily for leisure.
Presentation of the baseline characteristics of the survey
respondents better informs readers about the backgrounds
of the cycling training participants and their parents, and
also provides information for the linkage between socio-
demographic characteristics and cycling training participa-
tion in the conceptual framework.

3.3. General perceptions of cycling and cycling training
before and after the cycling training program

Perceived safety of cycling for cyclists themselves or for
other road users was low. Children and their parents alike
elaborated about various concerns relating to traffic danger:
(i) other road users must often swerve to avoid cyclists,
increasing accident occurrence; (ii) cyclists are difficult to
see on the road and are slower than cars; (iii) motorists
have low awareness of cyclists on the road; and (iv)

All p values calculated by performing binomial tests on the observed proportion
same proportion before training for the descriptions.
motorists are unsure of cyclists’ riding ability, in line with
conclusions from previous literature (Hopkins & Mandic,
2017; Kaplan & Prato, 2016; Kaplan et al., 2019). Table 5
provides the proportions of “yes”, “maybe” and “no”
responses of children’s and parents’ perceptions on cycling
and cycling training, and also the results of a binomial test
comparing the observed proportion of “yes” and “maybe”
responses combined, before and after training. It is apparent
that whether before or after their children’s training, more
parents perceived cycling on the road to be a threat to other
road users’ safety, at 65% and 59%, respectively, than chil-
dren, at 39% and 27%, respectively. Notably for both groups,
the “maybe” respondents increased after participation in the
cycling training. However, the binomial test did not find a
statistically significant change in the children’s nor parents’
perceptions for this item.

Considering that around 80% of parents remarked that

they felt judging risks on the road to be an important and
difficult skill for children (and over two-thirds feeling their
child was lacking in this skill), parents readily felt that
cycling training would help to protect cyclists’ safety, with
“yes” respondents standing at 70%–75% in the before and
after questionnaires. For children, this same figure was
around 55% for both questionnaires. Results of the binomial
tests indicated that there were no significant changes in this
perception item after participation in the cycling training
compared with before, for both children and their parents.
While most children considered the cycling techniques of
braking to be important (over 90%), and signaling to be dif-
ficult and lacking in themselves (over three quarters), they
did not link participation in cycling training with cyclists’
safety. For the helpfulness of cycling training in protecting
other road users’ safety, the proportion of “yes”, “maybe”
and “no” responses from parents were relatively similar
before and after cycling training at 63%–67%, 30%–31% and
3%–6%, respectively, and the binomial test showed no statis-
tical significance. In child cyclists, however, the combined
“yes” and “maybe” responses increased from 91% before to
100% after participation in cycling training, and the bino-
mial test for this perception item was statistically significant
at the p<.05 level. In this respect, participation in cycling
training does appear to have shifted children’s perceptions,
who now all grasp the importance of cycling training in
safeguarding other road users like pedestrians, drivers and
vehicle passengers.

The above discussion achieves the second aim of the
study in terms of understanding the general perceptions
toward cycling and cycling training of children and their
parents, and also addresses the linkage in the conceptual
framework between participation in cycling training with
changes in perceptions. Regarding the linkage between per-
ceptions in cycling and cycling training with change in
cycling frequency, the trends were not dissimilar with the
overall results, although the children who reported cycling
more did appear to be less certain in their perceptions
(more “maybes”), while parents held steadfast in their belief
that cycling training would be able to protect cyclists’ and
other road users’ safety regardless of whether their child
reported cycling more or not.

3.4. Factors associated with cycling more after

completion of cycling training

After completing cycling training, 24% of the participating
children reported cycling more (in terms of frequency and/
or duration). Percentage comparisons for various socio-
demographic characteristics are shown in Figure 2.
Statistically significant differences were seen for training
level, where 45% of Group 1 (introductory) participants
cycled more, but only 14% of Group 2 (advanced) partici-
pants reported the same (v2¼4.04, p¼.044). Also statistically
significant was original cycling frequency: of those who had
never cycled prior to training, 57% of cycled more after the
training program, while for those with some prior cycling
experience, only 15% cycled more (v2¼5.24, p¼.022). This
indicates that those who cycled more after the completion of
the training program were more likely to be novices with no
previous cycling experience. Other measures, such as those
for age, gender, independent and active mobility etc., can be
similarly interpreted. None had a discrepancy as large as the
two variables aforementioned, and indeed, testing using the
Pearson’s chi-squared statistic revealed no significant rela-
tionships for these variables (p>.05). These findings address
the linkage in the conceptual framework between the child
and parent socio-demographic characteristics with the likeli-
hood of cycling more.
Perceived improvements in cycling ability and confidence
are shown in Figure 3. Overall, 73% of children mentioned
improvement in cycling ability as one of the important
things gained from participating in the cycling training

program, and 61% of parents agreed. 70% of children
acknowledged that participating in cycling training
improved their confidence, while 64% of parents concurred.
In particular, for children cycling more, there was a greater
perception of improvement in the child’s confidence to cycle
among both children (75%) and parents (88%) than
improvement in cycling ability (both 63%). In summary, the
benefit of participation in cycling training not only allows
children to cycle to improve on their techniques and skills,
but also provides children especially at the introductory level
with the confidence to start cycling, which is consistent with
the discussion in the above paragraph. This discussion also
corresponds well with Goodman et al.’s (2016) notion that
the relationship between participation in cycling training
and cycling behavior change can be interpreted in multifa-
ceted ways, addressing the linkages between increases in

cycling frequency with improvement in cycling ability and
confidence to cycle.
To go further into the notion of confidence in the child
cycling, Table 6 shows the discrepancies in perceptions of
children and their parents, especially with on-road cycling
and cycling to school. Parents were concerned about their
child’s safety foremost, and were unconfident about allowing
their child to cycle on the road even after cycling training.
While cycling in general and cycling on bicycle tracks
received relatively positive responses from parents, cycling
to school received a low average score. No children changed
their primary travel mode to school to cycling. Children
who reported cycling more after training were more confi-
dent to cycle in the different situations listed, particularly
cycling on the road and to school, which were significant to
the p<.01 and p<.05 levels, respectively. This was contrasted

by the parents’ perceptions, where the relationship contra-                            
dicted that of the children’s. Children who reported cycling                            
more do not seem to have parents more confident of their                                
child’s ability to cycle in the different situations. These find-                       
ings are in line with those in the paragraphs above, in that                            
children who reported cycling more were the ones who                                    
increased in confidence to cycle, but not necessarily the                               
most skillful. This completes the linkage in the conceptual                             
framework between the confidence in the child cycling                                   
(from the parents’ perspective) with the change in                                      
cycling frequency.                                                                      
Together, the above findings help to accomplish the third                          
aim of the study in understanding the relationship between                              
changes in cycling frequency with (i) socio-demographic                                 
characteristics, (ii) overall self-perceived improvement in                             
cycling skills, (iii) post-training confidence ratings and (iv)                         
perceptions of cycling and cycling training, of children and                            
their parents. The factors and linkages in the conceptual                               
framework have thus all been explained in this results sec-                             
tion. The following section discusses the findings and their                            
implications for future research efforts and cycling policy                             									
											
towards children.
											
											
4. Discussion                                                                           
											
This study examined (i) children’s progression in cycling                               
ability through a short-term cycling training program                                   
designed for cyclists at different ability levels, (ii) children’s                      
and their parents’ confidence and perceptions related to                                
cycling before and after the cycling training program and                               
(iii) whether and why children’s frequency of cycling                                   
changed after the cycling training program. Generally, chil-                            
dren in Group 1 still need further training before being able                           
to safely ride on their bicycles in a live traffic environment                          
without assistance. These participants were the most enthu-                             
siastic to cycle more after training, because many of them                              
had no prior cycling experience. Parents would naturally                                
harbor safety concerns, and while children more self-confi-                             
dent with their own cycling abilities did go ahead to cycle                             
more, children cycling more seemed to have some connec-                                 
tion with parents being unconfident in their children’s abil-                           
ities, which differs from previous findings (Trapp et al.,                                  
2011; Willis et al., 2015). This seems counterintuitive, but it                         

is plausible that children may have been accompanied dur-
ing their increased cycling episodes, e.g. in enclosed cycling
parks, where parental concerns about cycling safety can be
alleviated, allowing children, especially novices, to practice
their newly learnt cycling techniques and skills. It may also
be to do with the variant aims of participation in cycling
training, namely to increase in confidence for novices and
to improve in cycling ability for those who already know
how to cycle (Goodman et al., 2016). Those who increased
in cycling frequency, mainly novices, cannot be expected to
improve their abilities significantly after a short-term train-
ing program, and it would thus be sensible that parents of
the novices remain unconfident in their child’s abilities. Not
owning a bicycle was cited numerous times as a reason for
not cycling more, but the similar proportions for cycling
more and not cycling more indicates that perhaps some chil-
dren owning bicycles did not use it more than before train-
ing. With the introduction of bike-sharing systems in Hong
Kong (Sun, 2017), and some with family-friendly children’s
bikes (Hoba Bike, 2018), bicycle ownership may become
more of a moot point in future.	
For Group 2 participants, they may already participate in
some cycling for fun and play, and the cycling training pro-
gram has perhaps represented an opportunity to equip
themselves with the appropriate cycling techniques and
skills, but not an incentive to cycle more than they already
do. Although all Group 2 participants claimed to know how
to cycle, some only completed the basic cycling techniques
taught in the first lesson with considerable difficulty. This
only gradually improved with the guidance of the profes-
sional cycling coaches. Before training, few children could
confidently ride single-handed or look backwards while rid-
ing, two cycling techniques that are vital for riding in a real-
life traffic environment. Children’s claims of knowing how
to cycle seem to be based primarily on their ability to cycle
in balance only, but not other important techniques and
skills that enable full control over the bicycle. Participation
in these cycling training sessions has enabled them to
understand the importance of being able to handle real-time
traffic on cycle tracks, at crossings and at intersections, and
ultimately improve their cycling abilities, as shown in the
professional cycling coaches’ evaluation.
Overall, in terms of efficacy of the cycling training pro-
grams, children perceived cyclists as less of a “threat” to

other road users after the training program compared with
their own and their parents’ perceptions prior to training,
and viewed cycling training as helpful to protect cyclists’
and other road users’ safety. Parents strongly agreed that
on-road cycling would pose a safety hazard to other road
users, and they were also highly confident that cycling train-
ing would help to improve the safety of cyclists, though less
so of other road users. These findings shed light into how
children and their parents perceive cycling and cycling train-
ing, pointing toward the important notion of road safety as
a joint responsibility of all road users, cyclists and motorists
alike. Improvements in children’s cycling safety would logic-
ally require cycling training with more practice to build up
experience to better judge live traffic environments, and
appropriate government policies that enable and encourage
active travel through improvements to cycling infrastructure
and active travel campaigns. This discussion echoes those of
Spence (2003, p. 694), who described the importance of
cycling training as a “final ingredient” for improvement in
cycling safety, in conjunction with maintenance of safe
routes to and from school. Ultimately, although there was
an increase in cycling frequency overall, the fact that no
children changed their school travel mode to cycling indi-
cates that the promotion of cycling as a safe and healthy
mode of transportation clearly still has a long way to go, at
least until when cycling on urban roads becomes more com-
mon (Loo & Tsui, 2010; Yao & Loo, 2016). Given the evi-
dence of positive feedback between increased bicycle use
and improved attitudes toward cycling (e.g. Thigpen, 2019),
wider implementation of cycling training would be a pro-
active and feasible way forward to promote cycling, in con-
junction with further improvements in the safety of
neighborhood environments.
The training period for participating children, at 4.5 h per
child, was quite short-term. Future research may seek to
arrange and investigate cycling training programs that run
for a longer period. For comparison, the Bikeability program
at Levels 1 and 2, organized by the Kingston Borough
Council in London, runs for 10 h (Kingston Council, 2018).
Although the exploratory nature of this study means that
findings and generalizability of this study need to be inter-
preted with care, there are cultural similarities in the East
Asian Confucian-influenced parenting style (Lim, 2012) as
well as environmental similarities in terms of high-density
developments (Barter, 2012) that enable useful comparisons
within the East Asian context. The implications from this
study represent an opportunity to further understand cycling
training programs in East Asia, and how they can be used

to first promote cycling for leisure and recreation in a place
where cycling is still only a minor travel mode. As the first
study to discuss cycling training in Hong Kong, it sets the
scene for further research related to cycling training pro-
grams in the city, in the region and beyond. While all link-
ages in the conceptual framework were addressed and
explained in descriptive terms for this study, there is an
opportunity for educators, policymakers and researchers
alike to investigate cycling training programs that run dis-
trict- or town-wide, to gather a larger sample and cater for

more children across more diverse socioeconomic back-
grounds, such as Mandic et al. (2018a, 2018b), and go fur-
ther in more rigorous statistical analyses. A larger study
would also account for differences in cycling training effi-
cacy for children versus adolescents. Longitudinal studies
may also be helpful when considering the long-term effects
of participation in cycling training, in understanding
whether the changed habits and improved cycling abilities
persist over time, such as that of Ducheyne et al. (2014).
To implement further change in the Hong Kong context,
there may need to be a redefinition of what it means to
know how to cycle. A proper gauge for whether one knows
how to ride a bicycle is important, to enable more people to
understand that learning to cycle is not just to learn traffic
rules, and that knowing how to cycle should not only be
about being able to keep in balance. The focus of cycling
education needs to shift towards educating children by
engaging them in actual practice with professional cycling
coaches out-of-classroom in cycling training programs. It is
also important for there to be sufficient professional cycling
coaches to teach children and the wider public how to cycle
and cycle safely. Chinese culture seems to ordain parents to
be more protective of their children, unlike Western parents
(Karsten, 2015; Lam & Loo, 2014), which shows that it is all
the more important that cycling education is implemented,
to convince parents that the ability and safety of child
cyclists can be improved (Spence, 2003). School-based
cycling training is a realistic prospect that is supported by
children and their parents alike. Proactive support from
schools would facilitate the process, especially for small-scale
and short-term training programs, which require limited
financial input. To go further in promoting cycling, how-
ever, favorable government policies with financial support
are needed to encourage more schools to implement these
programs (e.g. in Hong Kong, for schools in the New
Territories that have sufficient cycle tracks and parks
nearby). The changing of cycling perceptions and habits
need to go hand in hand with improvements of the neigh-
borhood environment and cycling infrastructure, in terms of
both quantity and quality (Aldred et al., 2019; Braun et al.,
2016; De Vos et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2016; Ohlms & Kweon,
2018; Scheepers et al., 2014). If city governments play a
leading role here to implement these changes, in promoting
cycling training and improving neighborhood environments
for active travel, cycling may start to become an increasingly
safe and viable option for all city dwellers in earnest.

5. Conclusion

This study has investigated whether children’s participation
in short-term, school-based cycling training programs can
promote cycling for schoolchildren in high-density cities, in
terms of changes in cycling ability, perceptions, confidence
and habits for Hong Kong schoolchildren. The children
showed improvements in their cycling ability with the pro-
gression of each training session. After the training, fewer
children perceived cyclists on the road to be a threat to
other road users, and all of the children agreed that cycling

training may enhance cyclists’ and other road users’ safety.
Parents generally held the notions of cycling on the road
posing as a clear hazard to other road users, and believed
that cycling training would be able to improve the safety of
cyclists and other road users. After participation in cycling
training, some children have begun to cycle more, which is
a positive sign. More action is required to promote safe
cycling as an activity not only for recreation, but also
beyond, as a sustainable transport mode for school and
work commutes. Cycling training programs have an import-
ant role to play in the further development of cycling in
Hong Kong, East Asia and beyond.