Children’s independent mobility: the role of school-based social
capital
    ABSTRACT                                                                                   
    Research has documented the decline in children’s independent mobility                     
    (CIM) globally. CIM is a measure of the level of a child’s freedom to move                 
    about his or her local neighbourhood without direct adult supervision. This
    paper explores the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of three intervention programmes to                        
    change travel behaviours of children to and from school in 26 Catholic                     
    primary schools in a range of urban and regional settings in Victoria,                     
    Australia. Using pre and post intervention surveys with 1600 students                      
    and parents, and interviews with school principals, we measured the                        
    in<U+FB02>uence of a range of individual, social, and built environment factors
    on the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of these intervention programmes. The degree of
    social connectedness of the school and the individual was found to
    have the most impact on the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of the intervention
    programmes to change behaviours, while the interventions themselves
    were not greatly e<U+FB00>ective without being embedded in a supportive
    school culture.
Introduction
Children’s independent mobility (CIM) is de<U+FB01>ned as the capacity of children to travel around their
neighbourhood without adult supervision or accompaniment (Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg
1990; Tranter 1993). Intervention programmes were developed partly in response to a global decline
in CIM (Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; McDonald 2007; Mitra, Papaioannou, and Habib
2016; Van Der Ploeg et al. 2008), with the attendant negative health outcomes including increasing
obesity in children and adolescents (Brussoni et al. 2015; Pabayo et al. 2009; Whitzman et al. 2009).
The key predictors of CIM include the child’s age (Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; Tranter
1993), gender (Brown et al. 2008; Carver et al. 2014; Giles-Corti et al. 2011), distance travelled (Hill-
man, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; Panter et al. 2013), the built environment in which they travel
(Curtis, Babb, and Olaru 2015; McMillan 2005; Villanueva et al. 2014), parental attitudes and perceptions (Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; Malone 2007; Mammen et al. 2012; Mitra et al.
2014) and social capital (Hume, Jorna, et al. 2009; Hume, Timperio, et al. 2009; Trapp et al. 2012).
    Behaviour change or intervention programmes that encourage more children to use Active Travel
(AT) modes – including walking, cycling and public transport – independently have existed for some
time. Most of these programmes emphasise the journey to school and are based in school curricula.
TravelSmart (2015) was implemented <U+FB01>rst in the UK in the 1990s, Ride to School (Bicycle Victoria
2009) in Victoria in the early 2000s, Walking School Bus in 1993, and Safe Routes to School (SRTS)
(Couch, Mccutcheon, and Cirocco 2001) in 1970s in Denmark. While some countries such as the US
have continued support for school-based intervention programmes such as SRTS (McDonald et al.
2014; SRTS 2019) often via infrastructure funding, government support for AT intervention programmes has declined across Australia (Whitzman 2013), particularly in Victoria with the demise
of Travel Smart (2015) and SRTS (2006). Poor performance and declining outcomes have caused
these to be discontinued or defunded following reviews.
    While the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of individual programmes has been studied (Couch, Mccutcheon, and Cirocco 2001; Garrard and Crawford 2010; Hubsmith 2006; Mammen et al. 2014b; McDonald et al.
2014; Peddie and Somerville 2006; Rose 1999), the role that schools themselves play in their e<U+FB00>ec-
tiveness has been somewhat neglected (Garrard and Crawford 2010). Mammen et al. (2014a) recognised the key role of schools in their implementation when reporting on trials of the School
Transportation Planning programme, which operated in Canada in 2010–2012. Conversely, Buliung
et al. (2011) concluded that school-based intervention programmes played a signi<U+FB01>cant role in mobilising surrounding communities. However, few studies have measured the comparative e<U+FB00>ectiveness
of intervention programmes based in schools; an exception being Buttazzoni et al. (2018).
    Based on research we conducted in 26 Catholic schools in Melbourne, the second most populous
city in Australia, we focus on school-based social capital. Many social theorists have written at length
on social capital going back to Bourdieu, Coleman and Putnam (Lewis 2010). Several forms of it have
been de<U+FB01>ned – bonding, bridging, and linking (Lin 2001; Putnam 2000). Lewis’ understanding of
social capital is used in this study (Lewis 2010). It is sometimes described as ‘social connectedness’
or just ‘connectedness’. He recognises that social capital is a multi-level, active concept, characterised
as action within networks by individuals. It is relational, and so there is an expectation of reciprocity,
from which trust may be the outcome. Social capital then becomes a deliberate choice of individuals,
such as community leaders, to take actions on behalf of themselves or their community. This leads
eventually to a connection to the roles of the parent and the school.
    The parent or caregiver is the gatekeeper of their children’s behaviours. The level of risk that they
perceive in the environment (Mitra et al. 2014; Rothman et al. 2015) and their assessment of the
child’s competence to navigate that environment safely (Gill 2007; Prezza, Alparone, and Cristallo
2005) will determine the licence’s that they grant their child to explore it independently (Tranter
1993). This research posits that social capital of the school and community is required to overcome
the strong parental fears relating to their child’s safety in the course of that travel.
    Several conceptual models (Garrard 2009; McMillan 2005; Mitra 2013) exist that explain the
interaction of factors discussed above to in<U+FB02>uence a parent/caregiver’s decision. This research
adopted a socio-ecological model to hypothesise about CIM, informed by previous research into children’s travel behaviour (Hume et al. 2009; Mitra 2013). We hypothesised multiple layers of in<U+FB02>uence
on CIM, which include (1) the individual behaviours and socio-demographic characteristics of a
child, homogenous socio-economic characteristics of the household and school, (2) social capital
characteristics of the household and school, social preferences and attitudes of the child and parent,
and (3) built environment characteristics of the neighbourhood and the neighbourhood environmental qualities (in this context, subjective perceptions of parents and child).
Methods
This paper derives from a research project which surveyed 26 Catholic schools across Melbourne and
regional areas in Victoria, Australia between 2009 and 2012. A previous paper examined the qualitative outcomes of that mixed-methods research (Love and Whitzman 2018). This paper addresses
the quantitative dimensions, focusing on the role of social capital in mediating other factors.
    In Victoria, Australia, one-third of primary students and almost half (45%) of secondary students
attend a non-government school, including Catholic schools (Melbourne 2014). All non-government schools, including Catholic schools, have larger catchment areas than an equivalent-sized government school. Parent/caregivers have chosen them speci<U+FB01>cally rather than a local government
school, which are often closer, for speci<U+FB01>c reasons including academic results, facilities, educational
or pastoral programmes, a particular faith environment, or purely for convenience. Understanding
the reasons for this choice may provide more insight into levels of CIM in students attending non-government schools. Catholic schools in a study in Melbourne were found to have lower CIM than
government schools (Carlin et al. 1997), but there has been little research since then into the levels of
CIM in relation to Australian Catholic schools.
    The study used a mixed methods approach to measure the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of three intervention programmes – TravelSmart, Ride to School and SRTS – which were run voluntarily by the schools over a
one-year period to increase active travel behaviours of children aged 9–12 years. This age cohort is
associated with behaviour-change competency years when they begin to travel independently on
school journeys (Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; Jago et al. 2009; Tranter 1993). Surveys
were distributed to children and their parents at baseline, and follow-up (12–18 months post-baseline). Interviews with principals were held to better understand factors that in<U+FB02>uenced the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of the intervention programmes.
The Programmes
Safe Routes To School (SRTS) is a school travel planning programme designed around <U+FB01>ve key
elements –education, encouragement, engineering, enforcement, and evaluation. Steps included
site assessments, mapping student locations, designing safe routes, development of an action plan,
recommending infrastructure changes to improve safety, and education programmes i.e. road and
bicycle safety programmes. It involves local council travel engineers, community and police representatives. In this iteration of SRTS, no funds were available to schools for infrastructure improvements, but a small amount of funding ($2000) was available to cover implementation costs (Sustrans
2015).
    Travel Smart is a similar programme, facilitated by a coordinator from a government transport
agency, but emphasised educational behaviour-change strategies over engineering solutions. Schools
received funding ($10000) to cover implementation costs and infrastructure changes (Peddie and
Somerville 2006; TravelSmart 2015).
    Ride2School is a strategy-based programme delivered externally through online support, which
provides schools with incentives, resources and strategies to implement the programme. It
encourages active transport generally, emphasising cycling to school. No funds were available to
schools (Bicycle Victoria 2009).
Recruitment of schools and participants
Thirty-six Catholic primary schools were selected to voluntarily participate in one of three intervention programmes or to be a reference school. The sample was equally distributed across four urban
regions – inner, middle, outer and peri-urban or regional locations (Melbourne 2014) – and targeted
schools with a range of socio-economic conditions. (ABS 2017). Twenty-six schools agreed to participate and implemented a one-year programme (response rate 77.7%).
    Four surveys were distributed to collect relevant data (Table 1). Two surveys were designed to
collect baseline personal, neighbourhood perceptions and travel behaviour information from each
child, and social demographic, built environment and social perceptions of parents or caregivers.
Race and ethnicity data were not collected. Two surveys were distributed post-intervention, a
<U+FB01>nal travel behaviour survey completed by the child, between twelve and eighteen months after
the baseline survey, and a survey completed by school principals. It collected their perceptions
about travel behaviours, and social capital of the school community (Caldwell and Harris 2008),
    To supplement quantitative data on the in<U+FB02>uence of social capital on the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of the intervention programmes, a 90 min semi-structured interview with school principals and programme leaders was conducted after the programme ended.
Outcome variable: children’s independent mobility
A categorical variable of CIM status was computed from children’s responses in baseline and <U+FB01>nal
surveys. Three categories (0, 1 or 2) were created depending on travel mode to and from school
and adult accompaniment. (O = not independent, 1 = independent one way, 2 = independent both
ways). A binary categorical variable was created by combining 1 and 2.
    The Change in CIM variable was calculated by recording any decline post-intervention e.g. 2–1, as
‘Decreasing IM’, and any increase e.g. 0–2 as ‘Increasing IM’. Those who did not change, were
described as ‘No Change’ in status. A binary dependent variable was created by combining ‘Decreasing IM’ and ‘No change’ into ‘Not increasing IM’.
    At the school level, we created a (continuous) dependent variable called ‘Increased IM’ by calculating the percentage whose IM had increased.
Independent variables
Independent variables were categorised into three groups: (1) individual characteristics including
travel behaviours; (2) social capital at neighbourhood and school community levels; and: (3) objective and perceived neighbourhood built environment variables. These are summarised in Table 1.
Street connectivity
The travel behaviours of primary school aged students who lived outside a cyclable distance, estimated to be two kilometres (SRTS 2015) for children of this age, would be unlikely to change.
The mean shortest road distance from home to school for students in the study was also 2.1 kms
(using OpenStreetMaps). Using network function of ArcGIS v17 software street connectivity (proportion of the school catchment reached in a journey of 2.1 km) was calculated, becoming the
pedshed for each school. Although more accurate (Buliung et al. 2013), it was not feasible to use
GPS technology to measure distance-travelled with this sized cohort.
Analysis
Descriptives
Frequency tables summarise key descriptives of the sample, including the number of students by
school, gender breakdown by age, SES of the students, parental education, and urban classi<U+FB01>cation
of the school (Table 2).
Regression models
Using SPSS (Version 17), each of the measures in Table 1 was tested with the dependent variables
(CIM at baseline and change in CIM) using bivariate cross-tabulations. Results with a p-value less
than 0.1 were included in regression models, to ensure that all variables found to be important in
the literature and research design were included.
    Two regression models – one at individual student level, one aggregated up to the school level –
were constructed using the independent variable measures identi<U+FB01>ed above, and used to explore
associations with baseline CIM status, and the change in CIM post-intervention. (See Tables 3–6)
These were introduced to the multinomial linear regression (at school-level) and binary logistic
regression (individual level) models in three groups using a backwards stepwise process, starting
with individual, then social capital, then built environment factors, re<U+FB02>ecting the socio-ecological
model hypothesised. The cut-o<U+FB00>s for exclusion during the stepwise processes were controlled by
SPSS using the Wald statistic, so were not mandated manually.
Results
Twenty-six schools participated, of which seven were non-intervention schools, eight ran SRTS, <U+FB01>ve
ran Ride2School, and six ran TravelSmart programmes. At baseline, 1598 nine to twelve year olds
participated of 3400 eligible students (47%). Of these, 1136 surveys had usable data for the baseline
study, caused by lost linkages between surveys, producing a <U+FB01>nal response rate of 33%. 831 <U+FB01>nal surveys were returned, of which 598 were able to be linked with their baseline surveys. All twenty-six
school principals completed post-programme surveys.
Sample characteristics
The sample characteristics at baseline are summarised in Table 2 below.
    This pro<U+FB01>le is consistent with the broader characteristics of students in Catholic schools, except
for the proportion of students from higher SES schools (>105). Although the school sample was constructed with the <U+FB01>nal mean SES of 101, di<U+FB00>ering student response rates within schools caused a
noticeable skew of the sample of students, resulting in higher male and female SES levels.
Associations with CIM at baseline
About one quarter (24.5%) of all students aged between 9 and 12 were independently mobile, and
half of these travelled independently to from and school at the start of the intervention. Table 3
shows the ten independent variables that were retained in the <U+FB01>nal logistic regression model from
the 28 variables that were introduced. Table 3 below displays a summary of the results at an individual level. Table 4 shows school-level results.
    The model in Table 3 retains ten of the 28 eligible items: <U+FB01>ve variables from the individual characteristics; two social factors; three built environment factors. All factors in the model except licence to
visit friends and tra<U+FB03>c volumes were signi<U+FB01>cant to p < .05.
    The gender of the child was not retained in the <U+FB01>nal model despite support in the literature for
gender di<U+FB00>erences within CIM. The urban classi<U+FB01>cation of the school was also not retained, despite
recording a signi<U+FB01>cant bivariate association with CIM.
    Table 4 below shows the school level results of a linear regression of CIM at baseline with a range
of covariate factors.
    At the school level, twelve factors in the model are distributed across all three bands of
characteristics: one individual factor, three built environment factors and eight social capital
factors.
    All factors in the <U+FB01>nal model except one were associated signi<U+FB01>cantly (p < 0.05) with CIM at
baseline.
    Unlike model 1 (individual baseline prediction model), neither physical counts of tra<U+FB03>c e<U+FB00>ects
nor parent-perceived tra<U+FB03>c exposure was retained at the school level model.
    Social capital factors such as neighbourhood connectedness – parents’ indication of children’s
regular play in the street and the parent perceptions that the neighbourhood is a good place to
grow up and people are willing to help each other – re<U+FB02>ect safe, strong communities around the
school. Similarly, there were signi<U+FB01>cant contributions to the model from two school community factors – the level of connectedness of parents with each other (knowing each other) and with the school
(willingness to get involved).
    Both of these factors had small negative associations with CIM, explained by the fact that the principal response is reversed. A negative correlation indicates that the principal strongly agreed with the
statements.
Associations with change in CIM (post-intervention)
The results were analysed at individual and school levels. Table 5 below sets out the change in CIM at
an individual level, with all the variables included in the binary logistic regression, with relevant odds
and p values.
     The model in Table 5 retained <U+FB01>ve of the 20 eligible variables introduced into the regression: two
individual, three social capital, but no built environment variables. The model also did not retain the
intervention programmes as predictors.
     The most powerful predictor of change in IM at the individual level is the mode of travel from
school at baseline. Children who walk or cycle to school are respectively 52 and 92 times more
likely to have increased their level of IM than the children driven to school by the end of the
programme. The second individual factor is the number of independent trips on the weekend,
which is associated negatively with increasing independent mobility on the school journey.
When compared to children who take three or more independent trips, children who take no
independent trips are one-third as likely to be independent going to school. The other three signi<U+FB01>cant factors relate to social capital and the perceptions that parents and children have about
their neighbourhoods. If a child believes he or she knows their neighbours well, then they are
four and a half times more likely to increase their independent mobility. If parents have a perception that the neighbours are willing to help each other, in other words have a strong sense of
community and responsibility, then the child is fourteen times more likely to have increased
independent mobility on the school journey.
     The third social capital factor appears to contradict this, as it appears to say that parents who
don’t share values with their neighbours are about eight times more likely to have children who
are increasing their independent mobility than those who do, once other factors are adjusted for.
School level analysis and the in<U+FB02>uence of social capital
The full list of 20 variables included in the individual level were re-calculated using the techniques
described in Methods section above. These variables were put into a linear regression model with
change in CIM as the continuous dependent variable. The purpose was to determine the relative
in<U+FB02>uence of the social capital factors on change in CIM at the school level. The results are listed
in Table 6 below.
     The model retained three factors only, Weekend Travel (% frequent and IM), school choice –
close by, and local organisation involved on the site. The last two were signi<U+FB01>cantly associated
with increasing independent mobility at school level. Both measure a desire of the parents or the
school itself to be actively associated with local community.
Discussion
This paper had two objectives: <U+FB01>rstly to investigate the baseline picture of 9–12 year old students’
independent mobility in Catholic primary schools in Victoria and the key factors associated with
CIM; and secondly to investigate the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of three intervention programmes in changing
children’s travel behaviours and the role of social capital in mediating that change.
Student’s independent mobility in Catholic primary schools
What becomes apparent in looking at the behaviours of children in Catholic schools in Victoria is
that they are typical of students in schools elsewhere when it comes to the factors that predict their
independent mobility status, except that levels of CIM in Catholic schools are approximately half to
three-quarters of levels that government school students display (Carlin et al. 1997; Curtis, Babb, and
Olaru 2015; Nicholson et al. 2014). With the notable exception of gender, factors such as the child’s
age (Curtis, Babb, and Olaru 2015; Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; McMillan 2007; Tranter
1993), the distance they live from school (Buliung et al. 2013; Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990;
McMillan 2007; Mitra 2013; Tranter 1993), the licence to ride independently on main roads (Tranter
1993), the amount of independent travel undertaken on weekends (Tranter 1993), and travel mode
to and from school (Carlin et al. 1997), were all key predictors of CIM in this study, and re<U+FB02>ect previous evidence.
    The <U+FB01>nding in this study that gender was not associated with of CIM at baseline is contrary to
most studies (Brown et al. 2008; Hillman, Adams, and Whitelegg 1990; McMillan 2005; Tranter
1993). There are studies in which gender has not found to be associated with AT modes to school
in the Australian and Melbourne context (Carlin et al. 1997), and in Canada (Mammen et al.
2014a). Despite this, the more likely explanation is that gender has been re<U+FB02>ected in other variables
such as the mode of transport to school, where cycling is dominated by boys. Therefore this result
should not be a rationale for neglecting to focus on strategies to assist girls to be more independent.
    This study found that built environment factors were associated with CIM at the individual level,
including objectively-measured shortest distance by road to the school, and parent perceptions of
tra<U+FB03>c volumes. Although previous studies have shown that this is an important correlate of CIM
(B Giles-Corti et al. 2011), it has not always been shown to be more important than other factors
(McMillan 2007; Villanueva et al. 2014). Further, the results demonstrated that perceived high levels
of stranger danger and road safety risks by parents and school leaders were associated with less IM,
supporting the literature that cites stranger danger and road safety as barriers to CIM or active travel
to school (Foster et al. 2014; Gill 2007; Hume et al. 2009; Malone 2007).
    The principal’s concern about road safety responds to wider concerns around roads and tra<U+FB03>c. If
the school treats road safety skills regarding tra<U+FB03>c very seriously, this may reassure parents, who in
turn may be more likely to allow independent mobility for the child after school and on the weekend,
both of which are strong predictors of CIM on school journeys.
    The urban classi<U+FB01>cation of the geographic location (suburb) of the school was not signi<U+FB01>cant in
either the individual or school model to predict IM behaviours. Schools in outer suburbs did record
lower levels of CIM, but other built environment variables were more reliable factors, such as the
distance from the school and parent perceptions of tra<U+FB03>c volumes.
Factors that change behaviours as a result of intervention programmes in schools
While these built environment factors were associated with CIM at baseline, they did not signi<U+FB01>cantly predict the change in IM as a result of the intervention programmes. Children living
in built environments that are conducive of AT may be more likely to have higher level of IM
than those that live in constrained environments, but this research demonstrates that the factors
that change behaviours, even in environments that are conducive to IM, are the personal, social
and cultural factors (Garrard and Crawford 2010). Where the built environment has been
shown to be associated with positive behaviour changes, these are generally over longer time
periods than the relatively short one year period of the present study and involve adults (Hirsch
et al. 2014).
    This research has found that the intent of the parent to allow a child to walk or cycle is vital. Their
con<U+FB01>dence in allowing their child to travel independently around the neighbourhood re<U+FB02>ects con<U+FB01>-
dence in their child’s competency. The child’s con<U+FB01>dence in their neighbourhood i.e. knowing their
neighbours, is also associated with an increase in the IM. Both of these convey that a sense of trust in
their neighbourhood is a precondition for change; obviously the parents trust is the key element and
has the greater e<U+FB00>ect before the child’s trust can be acted on. Similarly, at the school level, parents’
con<U+FB01>dence in allowing a child to travel independently around the neighbourhood was also associated
with IM but the attitude of the school to the child’s competency levels and their management of risk
becomes important.
    The school’s attitude is <U+FB01>rstly re<U+FB02>ected in the school’s attitude to the wider community. The involvement of other organisations on site displays an outward-facing stance of the school to the community, called connectedness. A deliberate decision of the school leadership is required to be outward-facing, which conveys a relationship of trust with the wider community on and o<U+FB00> site. This is a
measure of the active social capital of the school, which as we noted above, builds the trust of the
parent in that community (Lewis 2010).
    Secondly, when the school con<U+FB01>rms that they have competency in training their child to be
responsible on roads and in tra<U+FB03>c, it conveys a culture of care to the parent.
    These are indicators to the parent of risk being managed, controlled by the programme of the
school, and incorporated in its culture. These two factors are signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with changed
behaviours. This <U+FB01>nding is re<U+FB02>ected in research elsewhere (Buliung et al. 2011; Crawford and Garrard 2013).
    Whilst no intervention programme was found to be more e<U+FB00>ective of itself, the role of school culture in supporting the programme’s intent was critical. In principal interviews, the schools that
employed a whole-of- school approach i.e. programmes were embedded in the school’s culture,
were also most e<U+FB00>ective in changing behaviours (Love and Whitzman 2018).
    Creating a school culture in which CIM is valued, yet one in which risks are acknowledged and
managed, reassures the parent. They may not feel so isolated nor out-of-step with the values of the
school or the majority of the community (Nicholson et al. 2014). Children walking or cycling to
school independently is not yet a socially accepted practice, so parents need support. This <U+FB01>nding
is applicable for all schools. The policy implication for health authorities when implementing intervention programmes is clear – intervention programmes designed to leverage the school’s social
capital will have more probability of success.
    Finally, this research was unique in focussing on Catholic schools. It is appropriate to acknowledge a key di<U+FB00>erence to Government schools around school choice also impacts the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of
the intervention programmes. Our <U+FB01>nding that school selection based on local proximity or connection to community increases the likelihood of change in independent mobility on the school journey
is important for Catholic schools to understand. This re<U+FB02>ects <U+FB01>ndings of Canadian research into IM
which was associated with the reasons for selecting a neighbourhood (Mammen et al. 2012). This
may well relate to the proximity of their home to the school, or to a particular relationship they
have with the local Catholic community. Regardless, it may be important for non-government
schools to address the reasons for school choice for an intervention programme to be more e<U+FB00>ective.
It is further a<U+FB03>rmation of the importance of a person’s relationship with place when encouraging
change to personal mobility.
Limitations
This study had several limitations with regard to design and analysis of the <U+FB01>ndings. These include
the small sample of schools doing each programme, the limited built environment variables
especially the street connectivity measures with regard to the lack of GPS technology and robust
tra<U+FB03>c data for inclusion in the pedshed analysis. In addition, the loss of baseline records diminished
the reliability of the results. Regarding the analysis, the lack of factorial analysis of the variables may
have contributed to the contradictory <U+FB01>nding about gender.
    While not the focus of this article, further rigorous qualitative research investigating the
implementation of intervention programmes in schools could be helpful. Capturing how schools
in<U+FB02>uence the design of the programme internally and utilise their social capital, may lead to more
e<U+FB00>ective programmes within schools. This might also extend to post-intervention interviews with
children to gain their insights into success or otherwise of the intervention programmes.
Conclusion
At the most fundamental level, the research found that children attending Catholic primary schools
are typical of students in government schools once the increased distance from school to home is
allowed for. Predictors of the level of CIM at baseline are also consistent with previous studies, except
that the initial reason for the choice of a local nearby school was found to be a factor in Catholic non-government schools.
    The research has shown that no one intervention programme is more successful in changing
behaviours of children, but social capital has a role in improving the e<U+FB00>ectiveness of whatever travel
behaviour change programme is implemented in the school. This occurs mainly through the in<U+FB02>uence of the school culture. Intervention programmes implemented in an embedded fashion in the
school are able to overcome the powerful reluctance of parents to allow children to travel
unaccompanied.
    Because of this reluctance on the part of parents, it is important that schools be involved in intervention programmes because schools and school leaders can activate their social capital through the
networks that they control or participate in to build the trust necessary for parents to allow their
children to be independently mobile. Further, the school will bene<U+FB01>t by achieving higher social capital and more connectedness with and within the community if they do implement them in this
fashion.

