Vouchers, Magnet Schools,
Charter Schools, and Options
Analyzing the Effects of School and Housing Choices
on Mode Choice to School

abstract
The topic of safe routes to school has been researched since the 1970s,
and safe routes to school have been a goal of government programs since
1997. Despite the improvements made because of these efforts, the share
of students walking and biking continues to decline. Identified barriers
include parents’ concerns about safety, the environment, time, and
external factors such as traffic, weather, and distance. This research suggests 
that planners have overlooked two important factors influencing
distance: education movements since the 1950s for greater school choice
and affordable housing policies. Beyond desegregation, the creation of
magnet schools, vouchers, academies, charter schools, and other school
options has resulted in growing shares of urban students traveling long
distances to school. In Oakland, California, only 49% of students attend
school in the neighborhood where they live, and another 10,228 attend
34 charter schools with countywide enrollment. U.S. housing policies
have also changed. Construction of public housing has ceased, save for
the construction of replacement units. Housing voucher programs are
oversubscribed, and individuals with vouchers often change neighborhoods 
or cities to find a unit. Foreclosures, high prices, and low vacancy
rates in cities have also limited housing availability. School and housing
policies combined have eroded the economic location theory, in which
families balance housing and transportation costs to be near work and
good schools. The study uses surveys, time use diaries, and interviews
with 70 Oakland parents or caregivers. Results identify the complex
choices that affect school travel and offer potential ways for transport,
land use, and education planners to coordinate active travel to school.

Researchers who study most safe routes to schools (SR2S) programs
appear to assume that students live in the neighborhoods where they
attend school. However, this has not been the case since the 1950s.
This first assumption is closely tied to a second assumption that most
families live in the housing and neighborhood that they carefully
selected on the basis of neighborhood amenities, where they work,
and where they want their children to go to school, for example,
on the basis of the theory that families choose a city or neighborhood 
for a bundle of amenities or to balance housing and transport
costs (1, 2). In reality, attendance at a neighborhood school and
the availability of a broad choice of homes and neighborhoods in

which to live are not the norm for most families of moderate and low
income in the large urban school districts throughout the United
States. Instead, most families make the two choices over school and
housing at separate times through separate institutional processes.
This changing reality has tremendous significance for SR2S practice
and research.
For more than two decades, SR2S research has investigated the
multiple other barriers to active modes of travel to school. Public
health experts have also recently weighed in on the topic of SR2S
and view active modes of travel as a way to reduce childhood obesity.
However, the group that is least vocal in SR2S discussions is educators. 
Even educators who are interested in community and family
partnerships and recognize that transportation is an issue view transportation 
to be beyond their primary responsibility of providing a
quality education (3). In her research on school distance and location,
McDonald has started the conversation in the planning world that
the policies of education facilities are a major factor contributing
to distance and, thus, the ability of children to use active routes to
school (4). Before publication of that article, SR2S research that
examined education policies as the source of the commute mode
decision focused on school policies that restricted active modes,
such as whether schools had biking policies, adequate facilities, and
operational policies to address hazards at drop-off zones. Although
these issues have various but often minor impacts on active travel
modes, they are insignificant compared with distance in determining
the probability that a child will walk or bike to school.
In contrast, in a study conducted in Saint Paul, Minnesota, Wilson
et al. noted the effect of school choice policy (5). In their analysis
of commute modes for students who attended neighborhood versus
magnet schools, they found that students attending magnet schools
were less likely to walk, bike, or commute by auto and more likely
to commute by bus. Income and race were also factors, possibly
indicating that low-income families who choose magnet schools at
greater distances from their homes are not able to afford the time or
cost of driving their children to school.
McDonald suggests that community schools are a potential solution 
but cautions that their use neglects equity issues if students
are restricted to attending poor-performing schools within their
community (4). An increasing number of school districts are interested 
in planning more community schools; however, a community
school in the planning literature has a definition different from that
of a community or full-service school in the education world. The

definition in the education world is about the promotion of educational 
equity through the creation of higher-quality schools through
the provision of services at the school for both the students and

school-community members, in which school-community members
are defined as the principal, teachers, staff, parents, and students
of the school and not the geographic community surrounding the
school. Typical services include English classes, job search assistance,
family health clinics, and parent resource centers. By offering services, 
the schools hope to garner greater community, that is, parent,
involvement; and by providing more on-site services, they support
the child emotionally, physically, and developmentally (6).
However, in some districts in which the district is working with
urban planners or nonprofit neighborhood groups, the definition of
“community” is changing to be more spatially oriented. For example,
the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD) in the San Francisco,
California, Bay Area has launched a vision to make all schools community 
full-service schools. The vision blends the spatial aspect of
community, or neighborhoods, with the community of users and
providers. OUSD’s impetus for this vision is threefold. First, the
district believes that students need to be wholly supported to thrive
academically. Second, because of the district’s current options process, 
in which students do not have to attend their neighborhood
school, many neighborhood schools are declining in both academics
and enrollment, and this has had negative effects on school equity
(7). Third, California is one of the few states that do not mandate
district busing; therefore, OUSD students are responsible for their
own transportation. Thus, the goal of the vision is to make every
neighborhood school high quality and attractive to the families that
live nearby to reduce inequities by neighborhood and to reduce
student travel.
Nevertheless, because of the limited resources of schools and the
continued separation between school districts and local governments,
an obvious omission from the OUSD vision of full-service community 
schools are plans to improve the housing, retail, safety, transportation, 
and other amenities of the neighborhood. These things also
influence housing location choices and have positive or negative
effects on schools and student achievement. Even if the district were
to fully implement the vision, families may still elect to send their
children to schools in safer, wealthier, or calmer neighborhoods.
This paper builds on the findings of McDonald (4) and Wilson
et al. (5) that to tackle SR2S barriers, the distance to schools and
the policies contributing to longer distances need to be analyzed.
However, the paper goes beyond the school siting and options
decisions, which are part of the distance puzzle, and analyzes the
multiple conflicting policies for education, housing, and transportation
that collide to increase the distance and prevent many families from
simultaneously choosing a neighborhood for its accessibility, housing
quality, school quality, safety, proximity to friends and family, and
other amenities.
These policies are particularly at odds in major U.S. cities, in which
a substantial number of families rely on public transportation,
housing assistance, and public schools. The 100 largest school districts 
in the United States enroll 23% of U.S. public school students
and also have growing numbers of charter, magnet, and other types
of schools (8). To access their school of choice, many students rely
on transit systems that are increasing fares while cutting services,
if their parents do not drive them to school. In addition, most large
cities have multiyear waiting lists for housing vouchers. Furthermore,
housing prices and rents continue to rise in the most accessible
urban neighborhoods as singles, young couples, and empty nesters
return to cities for the urban lifestyle and walkability. These factors
create limited housing choices for many families of low and moderate 
income, and when paired with the option to attend a potentially
better school in another neighborhood, families often experience
transportation costs that are higher in both time and money.

The analysis is based on a mixed-methods study of 70 households
in Oakland, California. Data were gathered through surveys, time
use diaries, and in-depth interviews. The qualitative data provide an
in-depth understanding of the full context within which parents or
caregivers determine how their students travel to school, after they
have made their housing, transportation, and school assignment
decisions. The quantitative data allow comparison of households
according to multiple personal characteristics and external factors.
The purpose of the research is to understand how the urban environment 
(built, institutional, and social) affects the engagement of
parents in their children’s learning and schooling. How parents and
students travel to the school is relevant for engagement because it
affects the ability of parents to volunteer, meet with teachers, attend
events, interact with other parents, meet their children’s friends, and
coordinate their work schedules with their children’s school schedule.
Higher transportation costs associated with longer school commutes
also consume household finances, making it more difficult for families
to afford housing, food, extracurricular programs, computers, Internet
access, health care, leisure, and other goods and services.
The study’s contribution to the knowledge base is to confirm that
distance is a major barrier and, more important, provide a discussion
of the various policies that create greater distances between homes
and schools.

Literature

Safe Routes to School

Numerous papers on SR2S and active travel have explored the
various reasons why more children do not walk or bike to school.
Stewart’s extensive review of 42 studies identified four major
factors that most frequently influenced active travel to school (ATS):
“distance, income, traffic and crime fears, and parental attitudes and
schedules” (9).
As distance increases, the propensity to walk greatly decreases,
as it directly affects time. In general, the accepted walking distance
is approximately 1 mi (4). Income tends to be negatively associated
with active travel; greater incomes translate into the ability to afford
auto travel, and higher earners may have less flexible work schedules
that do not allow time for slower travel (10, 11). Minority and ethnic
status is also negatively associated with ATS, although this finding
is somewhat counter to the fact that vehicle ownership, which tends
to be lower among minority and ethnic groups, is also negatively
associated.
Several studies have found various relationships between parental
values and attitudes and the use of walking as a mode of travel to
school. These different relationships often occur because other factors,
including schedule, traffic, and distance, are more important deciding 
factors than attitudes or preferences. A parent may prefer to walk
for environmental reasons, but time constraints or traffic safety
concerns may prohibit it (12). Traffic concerns are typically greater
for younger children; as children move into middle and high school,
they are more likely to use active modes or to take public transit.
Older siblings may chaperone younger siblings, until siblings go to
separate age-specific schools. Another factor is family schedules,
which are typically defined by work status, which matters more
for female than male respondents. Students with mothers who are
employed full or part-time are less likely to use active modes. In
some studies, mothers working part time were found to be the ones
most likely to drive their children, possibly because the work schedule
may allow greater flexibility to drive (13).

Factors related to the built environment, including density, the
presence and quality of sidewalks, and the availability of parks
and playgrounds along the route, are positively associated with
active travel. If these factors are positive and the parents are also
interested in active modes, children are more likely to use active
modes. In this case, external factors complement parent attitudes
or values (14, 15).

Housing and School Choice Programs

Some good solutions for improved forms of travel to school have come
from the research and evaluations of SR2S programs. These solutions
have addressed the school policies, personal fears, information, traffic,
and physical barriers that prevent more active and environmentally
friendly forms of travel. At the same time that the transportation and
public health fields have been trying to solve the SR2S and active
travel dilemma, however, school policy changes have been working
against the ability of students to walk or bike to a nearby school and
have been doing so for a much longer period. Although safe travel
to school became a research concern in the 1970s, SR2S programs
did not begin until 1997 and were not adopted by Congress until
2005. However, reforms to promote school choice—attendance at
a school outside one’s neighborhood attendance area—began with
desegregation reforms in the mid-1950s and were quickly followed
by movements from across the political spectrum to promote school
choice through vouchers; through competitive admissions to magnet
schools, academies, and programs for gifted and talented students;
and, later, through charter schools, lotteries, and small schools (16).
Districts also have open policies for school assignment to traditional 
public schools. In OUSD, in addition to magnet schools,
academies, small schools, or charter schools, all students have had
the ability to participate in the options process since 2005. The
process allows parents to list their top eight choices of schools, and
through an assignment process based on four criteria (in order,
a sibling attends the school, the child is a resident of the neighborhood, 
program improvement schools, and open lottery), students are
assigned to one of their choices in the spring before the next academic 
year. Other cities have similar assignment and school options
policies. For instance, San Francisco has a lottery system; and
Chicago, Illinois, encourages families to first look at the neighborhood 
school and then the Montessori schools, small schools, charter
schools, military academies, fine and performing arts programs,
and many other options. As the first school district to desegregate,
Washington, D.C., has allowed students to attend out-of-boundary
and even schools out of the District of Columbia in the Maryland
suburbs since the 1950s.
Likewise, changes in the housing market and housing policy have
eroded families’ connections to both neighborhoods and neighborhood 
schools. For families of low and moderate income, the neighborhood 
school option is often inconsequential. Because of their
restricted housing and neighborhood choices because of ever-rising
home prices in desirable areas, foreclosures (on families or their
landlords), a tight rental market, reductions in public housing units,
and acceptance of housing choice vouchers by fewer landlords, many
families of low and moderate income do not choose where to live
on the basis of the school, where they would like to live, or the
desire to minimize travel but, rather, choose where to live on the basis
of where they are able to find a home that is available and affordable. 
As a result, they may stay in an apartment and not necessarily
be connected to the neighborhood.

This lack of attachment and the inability to pick their preferred
type of housing can result in frequent moves. Furthermore, at the
time that the family is selecting the child’s school, which is typically
the spring before the next academic year, it may not be sure where it
will be living that fall. In other cases, families may have intentionally
moved to a neighborhood and chosen a nearby school of sufficient
quality but then not receive their first choice in schools because of
the lottery system. Another possibility is that after a family selects a
neighborhood and school, it may be forced to move because of one
or more of the housing problems mentioned above as well as personal 
and socioeconomic issues, such as divorce, domestic violence,
physical disabilities or health issues, incarceration, job loss, or being a
victim of crime. Each of these reasons was noted by one or more of the
70 families in the case study conducted for the study described here.
Nevertheless, even though school choice policies have not been
fully addressed in the SR2S research, some members of the education 
and community development fields are slowly and cautiously,
given limited funding and concerns about resegregation, beginning
to rethink the school choice process (16–18). Although school choice
has been important in many ways as a means to attempt to give
all children somewhat equal access to a quality school regardless
of where they live, researchers have also documented significant
unintended consequences from choice policies. In response, the
national community schools movement, loosely led by the Coalition
for Community Schools, is partnering with states, cities, unions, and
other groups to promote full-service schools that are geographically
tied to a neighborhood (19). The neighborhood connection creates a
mutually beneficial relationship between the school and the surrounding 
residents. In theory, if the connection is fruitful, the neighborhood
may become more attractive to a more diverse set of households,
thereby reducing the need for school desegregation policies.
In the case of Oakland, if the district achieves its vision to be a
full-service community school district, families and students will
still have the ability to choose a school outside their neighborhoods, 
but the district hopes that the neighborhood schools of all
families will eventually be high quality and therefore each family’s
top choice. However, although the availability of more quality
schools will help, it may not affect the proximity between home and
school for some families. Families that lack affordable housing and
transportation will continue to have high rates of mobility because
many often choose to keep their children in one school rather than
transferring them to a new school with each move. Furthermore,
district policies sometimes prevent transfers in the case of a change
of address. The full-service community school model also has an
influence on transportation policies; for example, if the neighborhood 
school is beyond 1.6 km from home, which makes walking
less feasible, and it is cheaper and quicker to drive three children to
school than to pay for four bus fares (for one adult and three children)
and wait for a bus, many parents are likely to prefer transportation
by automobile, as determined previously (20) and from the author’s
interviews with caregivers.

Methods

Data

The data presented here are from a mixed-method case study
of 70 caregivers and their 126 school-aged children (attending 
kinder­garten to Grade 12) in Oakland. Data were collected
through two in-person interactions and the use of survey tools.

Participants were screened by e-mail or phone, after which an in-person
introductory meeting (10 to 15 min) was scheduled to deliver the
survey materials. Each participant completed a take-home 26-question
survey on that person’s demographics, housing, employment, and
transportation and a 2-day time use diary and returned it by mail.
On receipt of the materials, participants were interviewed for at
least 90 min about their housing, travel, neighborhood, and school
choices; their personal backgrounds, including where they were raised,
their education and attitudes toward it, and their parents’ attitudes;
the mix and extent of their social network; and how and when they
interact with their children and their children’s school(s).

Study Sample

To participate in the study, respondents were required to have at least
one child in kindergarten to Grade 12 in a traditional public or public
charter school in Oakland. Some parents did not live in Oakland but
their children attended school in Oakland, for example, because of
divorce or because they attended a charter school there.
Participants were recruited through flyer postings in public spaces,
such as libraries, credit unions, health clinics, parent centers, and
community colleges and postings to e-mail list serves through non-profit 
organizations to their members or directly to neighborhood and
parent groups. Several participants were recruited by referral through
other participants. As the sample size grew, participants were screened
by zip code to obtain an equal geographic distribution of parents.
Respondents lived in 12 of the 14 zip codes in Oakland and in three
other cities.
The goal was to obtain a sample whose demographics were a
hybrid of the demographics of both the city and the school district.
The sample had a slightly higher percentage of African-American
and mixed-race parents and a lower percentage of Hispanic or Latino
and Asian parents than the percentages in both the city and the school
district. The percentage of white parents in the study was between
the percentage in the city and the school district. It was difficult to
compare the three groups by income because of data limitations,
but the income distribution for the sample more closely represented
that for the population of the school district. Participants were a mix
of single never married, single divorced, and married or partnered
parents as well as other caregivers, including aunts, uncles, and
grandmothers. Their ages ranged from 23 to 60 years. Family sizes
ranged from one to eight children.

Case Study Site

The city of Oakland is a central city of 56 mi2 in the San Francisco
Bay Area. The 2010 census indicated that Oakland had a population of
390,725 people, a 2.2% drop from that in the 2000 census. The city has
historically had a large African-American population, especially in
comparison with the rest of the state: in 2010, 28% in Oakland and
6% in the state of California. In recent decades, the African-American
population has been in steady decline as African-Americans have
moved to other suburbs or other states. At the same time, the population 
of individuals of Hispanic or Latino origin has increased to
25% in Oakland but lags behind the state’s share at 38%.
The land use is a mix of urban and suburban style developments,
reflecting its major development period largely in the early part of
the 20th century as a second-tier industrial city with a strong street
grid, rail system, and growing port. It was incorporated as Oakland

in 1852 but experienced the largest population surge after the 1906
San Francisco earthquake and fire, when many San Franciscans
moved across the Bay and built homes through the 1910s and 1920s.
However, through the 1950s and 1960s, the city was substantially
reengineered because of the construction of the region’s Interstate
highways and the Bay Area Rapid Transit rail system, both of which
were centered on Oakland. Today, all areas of Oakland are disrupted
by freeways; but the west, north, and downtown parts of Oakland are
dense and walkable and are served by transit. East Oakland, however,
retains a grid; but the wide arterial streets, larger housing lots, and
numerous freeway ramps reflect a postwar suburban design.
Because of crime, city finances, state takeovers of the school district, 
extreme economic and racial residential segregation between
the portions of Oakland in the hills and flatlands, and persistent high
unemployment, the city has a negative reputation both locally and
nationally. Although parts of the city have attracted young urban
professionals, creative entrepreneurs, and top chefs, the city’s problems
have prompted many residents to move to other cities.
When low-income African-American parents and caregivers in this
study were asked in which Oakland neighborhood they would live
if they had a choice, they often responded with the names of the
surrounding suburbs. For many of these parents, all of Oakland is a
dangerous, gang-ridden ghetto with drugs and violence. Many are
eager to move away so their children will no longer be exposed to
crime and violence. When they were then asked how their children
would get to school if they moved to an auto-oriented suburb, they
were not concerned about the loss of transit or sidewalks. Their greater
concern was finding a calmer place to live. For higher-income
families, Oakland was perceived to be the convenient, affordable,
and sunnier alternative to San Francisco.
The regional planning agency recognizes both views of Oakland
but has identified the view of Oakland as an alternative to San Francisco 
to present a major opportunity to address the region’s housing
shortage, given Oakland’s transportation infrastructure, moderate
density, and extensive property disinvestment. Such qualities make
it a target for thousands of infill housing units. However, the regional
planning agency is also aware that poor school quality and high crime
rates will make it difficult to attract family households to Oakland.
The city’s school district currently enrolls approximately 36,262
students in about 131 traditional schools plus 34 charter schools.
Approximately 120 of the schools receive Title I funds, 89% of the
students are members of minority groups, and 71% are eligible for free
meals. The school district is in the process of rightsizing the system
because of annual declining enrollment. Nevertheless, the district
has been the most improved system in the state for the last 5 years.
It is also worth noting that because of rising transit costs and increasing 
distances to school, students, parents, and community groups
recently waged a campaign for low-cost or free transit for students
in San Francisco and Alameda County, which includes Oakland.
In July 2012, the metropolitan planning organization voted against
the free student passes.

Results

Overall, the 130 students in the sample have a high rate of active
travel: 37% walk or bike and 35% use public transit. Only 28% of the
children are driven to school on a regular basis. These rates of ATS
far surpass the national rate of ATS of 14% (21). This sample also has
other major differences from the national sample, such as opposite
trends for income, vehicle ownership, and work status.

To test the assertion of this study, that school choice, housing                      
policies, and transportation costs contribute to school commute mode                     
choice by creating longer distances from home to school, group                           
comparisons were conducted on the basis of four factors: distance                        
from home to school, household income, the caregiver’s age, and the                      
number of school-aged children in the household. Table 1 displays                        
the results of the t-tests for significance in the difference in the means               
between students who participate in ATS and students who are driven.                     
Only distance to school had a significant effect on whether children                     									
were more likely to use an active mode; that is, the greater that the										
distance was, the more likely it was that the children were driven.										
However, although distance has a significant role, information										
gathered through the in-depth interviews indicated that other factors										
also mattered, and these factors sometimes even influenced distance.                     
Table 2 presents the characteristics of families whose children are                      
driven to school. 
                                                                       
Employment Status   
                                                                     
As shown in other studies, employment status plays a role in whether                     
children use an active mode to school. For instance, several parents   

pursuing additional education had moved into temporary housing
situations to afford both school and rent, and therefore, their children 
attended schools in the neighborhoods of their previous homes.
In these cases, some children were driven and others rode the bus
with their mother. The number of hours of employment per week
also had various influences on the mode choice. Some single parents
in the study could take only jobs that offered less than 20 h of work
per week so that they could take their children to and from school.
Single caregivers who worked full time were more likely to drive
their children to school since they did not have time to arrange separate 
bus trips and they often needed their car for work. Children with
two caregivers were more likely to use active modes. These families
made this mode choice for a number of reasons: families with two
caregivers typically earned more money and therefore could afford
housing near a better school, caregivers took turns taking the children
to school, or one caregiver worked and the other one took care of
the household and took the children to school.

Race and Ethnicity

White students had the highest share of walking to school in this sample
because their families were most able to choose a neighborhood                  

for housing, school quality, and walkability. Many were environmentally 
conscious and preferred active travel. They were also close
with their neighbors and had created walking pools to save each other
time taking their children to school. The Hispanic or Latino parents
and some of the African-American parents in the study had chosen
schools distant from their homes for quality, culture, and ethnic and
racial diversity greater than that in their neighborhoods. Whether
the parents used a car or public transit was related to a variety of
different factors other than race or ethnicity, including vehicle
ownership, work status and commute, marital status, transportation
costs, and their children’s age and gender. Except for help from
relatives who sometimes drove or chaperoned their children to school,
none of the Latino or Hispanic parents or African-American parents
had relationships with neighbors to share the school commute
responsibility. Although some parents casually knew their neighbors, 
few trusted them, and because of the high share of students
attending schools out of the neighborhood, it was unlikely that the
neighbor children attended the same school.

Family Structure

Family structure has a major influence on whether the students in
the sample were able to walk, as noted in the section on employment
status. The highest share of walkers was in families in which the
caregivers were a married couple. Among higher-income families,
walking to school was possible because the family could afford to
live in the desired neighborhood, which was a walkable neighborhood
where the children could walk to school. For lower-income couples,
walking was a less expensive mode and one of the partners needed the
car for work. For two of the single dads and several single mothers,
students were unable to walk because the parents selected schools
according to their quality rather than distance from home. In other
cases, students attended the school near where the family lived before
the parents separated. Others sent children to a school near grand­
parents, who assisted with care before and after school while the
parent worked. Parents with multiple children tended to walk their
younger children and the older students used public transit. In some
cases, the mother drove all the children to their separate schools
because she was already driving the younger children who were too
young to take transit to the non–neighborhood school. The nonparent
caregivers (aunts, uncles, grandparents, and foster parents) in the
sample were more likely to be older, and their dependent children
had a high rate of transit use. Only one nonparent caregiver drove the
children to school; others did not own cars because of low incomes,
and others were less willing or able to arrange work or personal
schedules to take the student to school.

Vehicle Ownership

Unlike the findings of other studies, greater vehicle ownership did
not decrease active travel. The caregivers in only 36% of households
with two or more cars drove their children to school. In some cases,
these families had higher incomes and a preference for walkability
and therefore purchased homes within walking distance to good
schools. In other cases, parents or older siblings used the cars for
work and the students were old enough to use transit or another parent
walked them to school. However, for lower-income parents with a
car, both income and vehicle ownership determined mode. Because
the parents were able to purchase cars for as little as $900, it made

more economic sense to them for their children to drive than to pay
for transit. To cover driving costs, they also used strategies that were
not available to pay for transit fare, such as foregoing insurance,
repairs, or inspections; having friends provide gas money; and sharing
the car with a relative or sibling. For some, the car was an easier
and cheaper alternative to spending $12 or more per day for several
round-trip bus fares. Driving also allowed some caregivers to sleep
later than they could have if they were to use the bus to take their
children to school. Because in many of the families a parent and a
child or several children shared a bedroom, sleep was difficult, so
extra time was preferred.

Housing

Of the caregiver who rented with or without a voucher, 56% drove
their children to school. Renters with vouchers were slightly more
likely to drive than renters without vouchers. Parents who rented
were more likely to be mobile, with some changing housing every
year because of bad landlords, unsafe neighborhoods, or poor housing
conditions. Instead of switching schools with each move, some parents
had their students remain in the school near their prior home. Housing
choices are becoming more difficult for families of all incomes in
Oakland. Even parents with graduate degrees and incomes above
the median are receiving help from families to purchase, rent, or
share housing. These housing choices did not align with their school
choice in most cases, necessitating nonactive travel.

School Choice

Some principals of the small schools and charters have actively
recruited students to their schools by soliciting parents in the district
office during the enrollment period. One of the schools has numerous 
devoted, low-income parents who drive or take the bus with
their children 10 mi each way. Of the students who attended charter
schools, 40% were driven to school; this number is 1.6 times the
percentage of students who attend a traditional public school.

Conclusion

This research shows that how children travel to school is often not
a direct decision but an indirect consequence of limited housing
choices because of family structure and incomes and transportation
decisions for all travel, which are based on time, convenience, and
daily cash outlay. School choices are also a major factor; and although
parents technically have a choice of the schools where they send their
children, the choice is also limited by school district assignment
policies, seat availability, and the ability to submit their choices on
time. As a result of these three disparate factors, many families of
moderate and low income in Oakland are living greater distances
from their children’s school. Not only does this prevent their children
from walking to school, but it also creates higher transportation
costs for the families, as well as opportunity costs when children’s
school travel schedules prohibit parents from working more hours
or from using the money that they spend on transport to pay for
other things.
Nevertheless, the large share of students in this sample who were
not driven to school in Oakland is promising. For some parents,
ATS is by choice for a certain lifestyle, although for others it is an

economic necessity or the easiest mode, given their current living
situation. Because school options processes are not going away
and housing choices are not getting easier, SR2S programs should
include additional outreach strategies to address the transportation
mode for students in schools that are increasingly not in the neighborhood 
and farther away. First, SR2S programs should include safe
routes to affordable transit as part of their programs. All transit rides
begin and end with a walk trip, and if transit has high ridership, auto
trips are reduced and walk trips increase. Second, SR2S programs can
also help parents to arrange carpools, walk pools, and transit pools.
This assistance would help parents who do not know other parents
reduce their transportation costs and time and potentially reduce
the number of parents driving their children. The school districts
know where children live and go to school and could help to provide
SR2S program coordinators with these data to arrange these various
types of travel pools. Without this expansion of SR2S programs, as
school distances continue to increase, if low-income parents can
more affordably drive three students to one or more schools, given
increasing transit fares and low auto costs, the auto share of the
commute to school will likely increase.
In the longer term, distance should be addressed through collaborative 
partnerships between school districts, city planning departments, 
transit agencies, housing agencies, and other government
agencies affecting family decisions and costs of living. As McDonald
succinctly states: “If policymakers want to increase walking rates . . .
current policies, such as Safe Routes to School, which do not affect
the spatial distribution of schools and residences, will not be enough
to change travel behavior” (4).
SR2S programs could be the convener for some of this work by
inviting education agencies to join non–education agencies to create 
full-service community or neighborhood schools that can be
accessed by active modes. This collaboration is important, because
even if the services at a school are improved, if the neighborhood
has high crime, poor housing stock that does not meet the approval
of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for
voucher use, a lack of quality day care, and few jobs, parents may
continue to choose to send their children to schools outside the
neighborhood where they live. They may also move to other neighborhoods 
or cities. Thus, to promote schools that are higher quality
according to student achievement and allow sustainable travel, policies
need to address housing, schools, transportation, recreation, child
care, neighborhood retail, social capital, crime, and jobs.
Charter schools should also be addressed because in most school
districts they open and operate their facilities in unplanned locations
and non–school buildings. Land use planners and departments that
oversee city zoning and subarea plans and that issue building permits
should try to bring together the charter school operators, the school
district facilities team, and transit operators to identify appropriate
locations for charter schools, including sites that are accessible
by transit, walking, and biking and in spaces that are conducive to
learning. They should also be near other locations that serve the
needs of families, such as after-school programs, parks, and day
care facilities, to minimize the distances between locations to which
parents must make daily trips. Planners should also encourage them
to locate in areas that lack schools within walking distance of most
residences. In Oakland and other cities, charter schools have located
near existing schools, which creates an abundance of schools in one
area but a lack schools in other areas. In Washington, D.C., charter
schools have moved into empty downtown office space and schools
in neighborhoods have been converted to condominiums.
In several large cities, crime is also a major issue affecting families
and student travel to school. In this study, several participants lived in a
new affordable housing development with quality and attractive units,
supportive services, a community center, a large park, a nearby elementary 
school, and convenient access to a Bay Area Rapid Transit
station but were seeking to move elsewhere. The beautiful complex
had been plagued with shootings in the park and the school. Although
the parents were fond of the school and its proximity, they would
prefer to live in a safer neighborhood and change schools. Several
other parents in the study were also seeking to move to suburban
areas to leave behind the high crime in their neighborhoods.
In this era of privatization and individual choice as policy (22, 23),
planners need to forget their standard assumptions about urban
economics. Municipalities do not provide as many bundles of services.
Transit is not always the affordable option because of the availability
of cheap used cars, the predominance of the auto infrastructure, and
cuts to public transit service. Where schools are built or already exist
does not determine where kids go to school, as school districts and
charter schools promote choice, entrepreneurialism, and options.
Housing choices in accessible locations are limited for families
of low and moderate income, and even dual-income couples with
college and graduate degrees have trouble affording homes in the
neighborhoods that they desire.
This study shows the value of in-depth interviews with caregivers
of different backgrounds and circumstances with different housing
and school choices living in different neighborhoods. The information 
allows a better understanding of the multiple reasons why
parents select their children’s travel mode to school. Without the
qualitative data, attempts to explain the variation in travel mode
among caregivers of similar socioeconomics would be difficult.