Enrolling in the Closest School or Not? Implications of school                                                                                   
choice decisions for active transport to school
ABSTRACT
Background: Absence of requirements to attend a local school combined with social factors
driving school choice make distance to school less important in school choice decisions. This
study examined correlates of adolescents’ enrolment in the closest school in the absence of school
zoning policies.
Methods: Adolescents (n=797; age: 15.2 ± 1.4 years; 51.4% boys) from six non-integrated(regular) public secondary schools without school zoning in Dunedin, New Zealand, completedan online survey about school choice. Distance to school was calculated using GeographicInformation Systems network analysis. Data were analysed using t-tests, Chi-square tests andmixed e<U+FB00>ects binary logistic regressions.Results: Overall, 51.3% of adolescents enrolled in the closest school (range across schools: 28.3%to 81.6%). These adolescents had <U+FB01>ve times higher rates of active transport (46.5% vs. 8.8%) andlower rates of motorised transport to school (40.3% vs. 68.8%) compared to their counterparts(all p < 0.05). In a multivariate analysis, enrolment in a co-educational school [OR (95%CI):4.51 (2.60–7.80)] and choosing school because of its proximity to home [2.29 (1.97–2.66)] were
positively associated with enrolment in the closest school, whereas distance to school [0.86
(0.82–0.90)] and negative comments from students at closest school [0.68 (0.47–0.98] were
negatively associated.Conclusions: In the absence of school zoning, shorter distance to school, importance of school'sproximity to home, co-educational school status, and absence of negative peer feedback wereassociated with adolescents’ enrolment in the closest secondary school. School choice decisionshave implications not only for education but also for public health, transport and environmentalsustainability. A multi-sector approach and extensive collaboration between educational policymakers, urban designers, health promoters, and community groups is required to reduce thetensions between parental and students’ school choice expectations of getting the best educationpossible and the goal of increasing rates of active transport to school.

1. Introduction
     During the last few decades there has been a shift in travel mode to school in many developed countries, with decreased rates of
walking and cycling to school and increased rates of motorised transport; especially driving children and adolescents to school (Gray
et al., 2014; McDonald, 2007; Ministry of Transport, 2011). In New Zealand, the rates of adolescents being driven to secondary school
have increased from 21% in 1989/1990 to 32% in 2010–2014 (Ministry of Transport, 2015). A shift away from neighbourhood
schools led to increasing the distance that children and adolescents have to travel to get to school (McDonald, 2007), which can in
part explain reduced rates of walking and cycling to school observed in developed countries over the last few decades (Davison et al.,
2008; Panter et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2011). In addition to reducing opportunity for physical activity in young
people, increased rates of travelling to school by private vehicles have also led to increased tra<U+FB03>c volume, increased tra<U+FB03>c
congestion around schools at drop-o<U+FB00> and pick up times, increased air pollution and increased safety concerns for children and
adolescents who walk or cycle to school (Eyler et al., 2008; Frank and Engelke, 2007; Maibach et al., 2009; Parusel and McLaren,
2010).
     School choice is a multifaceted issue with socio-cultural, economic and political implications, particularly relating to equity and
social justice (West, 2006). Access to educational opportunities, and particularly ‘good’ schools, is strongly related to housing, spatial
form and transport (e.g. DeLuca and Rosenblatt, 2010; Dougherty et al., 2009; Müller et al., 2008; Phillippo and Gri<U+FB03>n, 2016; Wilson
et al., 2010). School choice is informed by a number of individual and collective norms. In ‘developed’ countries, school choice policy
has shifted in line with neoliberal ideals of individual choice and competition. Freedom of choice in education is a hotly contested
public policy, and has been widely debated (Bunar, 2010). Freedom of choice in education has manifested in a range of policies
including the removal of school zoning. This policy has resulted in attendance at schools that are geographically distanced from the
child's place of residence. Thus freedom of choice has implications for transport to school mode choice and travel behaviour (Wilson
et al., 2010).
     Available evidence indicates that the role distance plays in the choice of, and access to, educational institutions is complex. For
example, the Longitudinal Study of Australian Youth explored the association between distance to a university campus and university
choice and admission, including enrolment in an elite university in ~12,000 adolescents (Parker et al., 2016). The <U+FB01>ndings indicate
that distance exerts an in<U+FB02>uence on students’ choice beyond socioeconomic background and academic ability and suggest that
distance a<U+FB00>ects aspirations well before issues related to cost and relocation become a barrier. In the US, research has shown that for
elementary school children, mode of transport to school and parental school choice di<U+FB00>er by school type, income and race (Wilson
et al., 2010).
     Unlike students who attended their closest ‘neighbourhood’ school, students attending schools for other reasons (e.g. not distance
related) include students from a wider catchment area with lower rates of active transport (e.g. walking and cycling), identifying the
“unintended in<U+FB02>uence of school district policy on school commute mode” (Wilson et al., 2010: 2168). Preliminary <U+FB01>ndings from the
city of Dunedin (New Zealand) show that social factors and school programmes/facilities rather than proximity to home in<U+FB02>uences
secondary school choice decisions (unpublished <U+FB01>ndings). Therefore, absence of requirements to attend a local school combined with
social factors driving school choice likely make distance to school less important in school choice decisions.
     Research has also elucidated the relationship between school choice, distance to school, and transport-related emissions.
Transport contributes over 20% to global greenhouse gas emissions, and 72% of transport sector greenhouse gas emissions arise from
road-based transport (Sims et al., 2014). Wilson et al. (2007) examined the travel distance, greenhouse gas emissions and exposure to
air pollution related with attending neighbourhood or city-wide schools. They found that attendance at a city-wide school, rather
than a local school resulted in “six times fewer children walking, 4.5 times as many miles travelled, 4.5 times the system cost, and 3 to
4.5 times the amount of criteria air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions” (Wilson et al., 2007: 506).
     School choice in Aotearoa New Zealand is a complex and disputed <U+FB01>eld, with multiple factors in<U+FB02>uencing how parents and/or
students choose a secondary school. The 1989 Education Act and subsequent legislation, which removed school zones, radically
reshaped school choice (Stubbs and Strathdee, 2012). These school reforms underpinned by neo-liberal ideologies that emphasise the
importance of individual choice, resulted in increased strati<U+FB01>cation between low- and high-decile schools1 (Gordon, 2015; Harker,
2000; Nash and Harker, 2005) and a culture of parental school choice frequently driven by factors other than distance to school (e.g.
characteristics of the school population, school's academic achievement, reputation, environment, and safety) (Gordon, 2015).
     Taken together, school choice and school zoning policies have implications not only for education but also for public health,
transport, and sustainability. This paper extends the literature by examining correlates of adolescents’ enrolment in the closest
secondary school in the absence of school zoning policies in the city of Dunedin, New Zealand, and its implications for active
transport to school.
2. Methods
2.1. Setting
     The study was conducted in the city of Dunedin (population: 130,000) on the South Island of New Zealand. The city of Dunedin
has 12 public secondary schools and no private schools. All twelve secondary schools (100% school recruitment rate) participated in
the Built Environment and Active Transport to School (BEATS) Study in 2014–2015 (Mandic et al., 2015b; Mandic et al., 2016).
Details on school recruitment have been described elsewhere (Mandic et al., 2015b). For the purpose of this analysis, only six non-integrated (regular) public schools without school zoning / enrolment schemes at the time of the survey were included in this report
(three co-educational, two single sex boys and one single sex girls’ school).
2.2. Participants
     Adolescents (n=797; age: 15.2 ± 1.4 years; 51.4% boys) were recruited through their schools. Details on adolescent recruitment
have been described elsewhere (Mandic et al., 2016). All adolescents signed consent for taking part in the study. For those under 16
years of age, parents consented following opt-out or opt-in procedures based on the school's preference. The study was approved by
the University of Otago Ethics Committee.
2.3. Procedures
     Adolescents completed an online survey during class time under supervision of research sta<U+FB00> (Mandic et al., 2016). The survey
included questions about sociodemographic characteristics, home address, transport to school habits and reasons for school choice.
2.3.1. Sociodemographic characteristics
     Age was calculated from date of birth at the time of the survey. Home address data were used to determine the New Zealand Index
of Deprivation (a neighbourhood area deprivation score) as a surrogate for students’ socioeconomic status (Salmond et al., 2007). The
deprivation index was recoded from the original 10-point scale (1=least deprived to 10=most deprived) into quintiles. Adolescents
reported the number of siblings enrolled in the same school and the number of bicycles and vehicles at home.
2.3.2. School-related factors
     School-related variables included co-educational status (co-educational schools; boys only or girls only schools), school size and
school decile (1=most deprived to 10=least deprived). School decile is an indicator of the socioeconomic status of the school
(Ministry of Education, 2016). School decile is based on the proportion of students at the school with low socioeconomic status as
de<U+FB01>ned by the student's residential address. Decile 1 includes the 10% of schools with the highest proportion of students from low
socioeconomic communities; decile 10 the lowest proportion.
2.3.3. Distance to school
     Distance from home to school was determined using Geographic Information Systems network analysis, as described previously
(Mandic et al., 2016). Distance was recorded both to the school where adolescents were enrolled and to the closest of the six non-integrated schools without school zoning in Dunedin (the smallest value of a set of shortest distances from home to each of the six
schools). Enrolment in the closest school was determined based on comparing the distance to the school each student currently
attends and closest school for each participant. Threshold distance for walking to school (=2.3 km) was calculated using Receiver
Operating Curve analysis based on BEATS Study data (unpublished <U+FB01>ndings) and was similar to previous <U+FB01>ndings in British (Chillon
et al., 2015), Irish (Nelson et al., 2008) and Belgian adolescents (Van Dyck et al., 2010). The cut point for a reasonable cycling
distance (=4.0 km) to school was based on a previous study (Nelson et al., 2008).
2.3.4. Transport to school
     Transport to school habits were assessed using an item “How do you usually travel to school?” for di<U+FB00>erent transport modes with
response categories “never”, “rarely”, “sometimes”, “most of the time” and “all of the time” (Mandic et al., 2017). Dominant modes of
transport to school (used “most/all of the time”) and multi-modal transport were used to classify adolescents into active transport
(walking, cycling, or riding a non-motorised scooter “most/all of the time”), motorised transport or combined motorised and active
transport (Mandic et al., 2017). Adolescents also reported frequency of walking to school in the previous two weeks, as described
previously (Mandic et al., 2017).
2.3.5. School choice
     Adolescents were asked about who chose the school and how much they agreed or disagreed with 14 items related to school
choice (including proximity to home, preference for co-educational status of the chosen school, social connections (siblings/parents/
friends attending/attended), positive comments about the school students attend from parents/students at that school and negative
comments from parents/students at the closest school. Adolescents recorded their responses on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from
1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree. An additional response option (“I don’t know”) was provided. Adolescents were also given
an opportunity to specify other reasons. Categorical variables were created by recoding original responses as follows: “strongly
disagree” and “disagree” were recoded into "disagree"; “neither agree nor disagree” was coded as "neutral"; “strongly agree” and
“agree” were recoded as "agree". “I don’t know” responses were reported separately where appropriate. School choice questions for
this study were designed by the BEATS Study research team based on input from Dunedin secondary schools and school principals.
All schools had the opportunity to provide feedback on the school choice questions.
2.4. Data analysis
    Sociodemographic characteristics were analysed using descriptive statistics. School choice items related to siblings’ enrolment
and preference for single-sex and co-educational school were analysed only in adolescents who had at least one sibling and who
attended single-sex or co-educational school, respectively. Di<U+FB00>erences in sociodemographic characteristics and school choice between
adolescents who did and did not enrol in the closest school were compared using independent samples t-test or Mann Whitney-U test
for continuous variables and Chi-square tests for categorical variables. Data are reported as mean ± SD for continuous variables (“I
don’t know” responses were excluded from these analyses) and frequency (percentage) for categorical variables.
    Mixed e<U+FB00>ects binary logistic regression models were used to identify factors associated with enrolment in the closest school. The
models incorporated a random e<U+FB00>ect at the level of the intercept to account for the school-based cluster sampling design. Signi<U+FB01>cant
univariate correlates and sociodemographic characteristics (age, gender, ethnicity and neighbourhood level deprivation score) were
entered into multivariate analysis. “I don’t know” responses were coded as missing data and were excluded from the analysis. P-value < 0.05 was considered statistically signi<U+FB01>cant both in the univariate and multivariate analyses. Data analysis was performed
using SPSS Statistical Package (Version 22).
3. Results
3.1. Sociodemographic characteristics
    Data from 797 adolescents (age: 15.2 ± 1.4 years; 51.4% boys; 73.4% New Zealand European; 12.7% Maori) were included in the
analysis (Table 1). Overall, 72.1% of adolescents had at least one bicycle available at home, 63.2% had two or more vehicles at home
and 28.5% had one or more siblings attending the same school (Table 1). Half of adolescents (51.3%) enrolled in the closest school.
Among adolescents who enrolled in the closest school there was a greater proportion of girls, adolescents enrolled in a co-educational
school and adolescents with sibling(s) enrolled in the same school and a lower proportion of adolescents with two or more vehicles in
the household compared to their peers who did not enrol in the closest school (Table 1). Age, ethnicity, socioeconomic status and
availability of the bicycles at home were not signi<U+FB01>cantly di<U+FB00>erent between the groups.
3.2. Distance to school
     In the total sample, median distance to school was 3.2 km (range: 0.3 km to 54.5 km) (Table 2). Approximately one third of
adolescents lived within walkable distance (=2.3 km) and more than one half lived within cycling distance (=4.0 km) to school
(Table 2). Median distance to school among adolescents who enrolled in the closest school was 4.0 km closer to school with 10 times
more adolescents living within walkable distance to school and 2.6 times more adolescents living within cycling distance to school
compared to their peers who did not enrol in the closest school.
3.3. Transport to school
     In the total sample, nearly half of adolescents were usually driven to school, one third walked to school and one <U+FB01>fth used the
school or public bus (Table 2). Overall, 54.2% of adolescents used motorised transport only, 28.1% active transport only and 17.7%
combined motorised and active transport to school (Table 2). Adolescents who enrolled in the closest school had three times higher
rates of walking as a part of their journey to school, <U+FB01>ve times higher rates of traveling to school by active transport only and lower
rates of reliance solely on motorised transport to school compared to adolescents who did not enrol in the closest school (Table 2).
3.4. Reasons for school choice
     Overall, two thirds of adolescents attending a co-educational school chose such a school due to its co-educational status.
Approximately half of adolescents indicated friends’ enrolment, positive comments from students and parents at school, school's
facilities and sports programmes as important factors that in<U+FB02>uenced school choice (Table 3). Among adolescents who enrolled in the
closest school, a signi<U+FB01>cantly greater proportion reported choosing their school because of its proximity to home and existing social
connections (siblings attended/enrolled; parents/other family members attended; friends enrolled) and a lower proportion chose
their school because of schools’ facilities, sports programmes, positive comments from parents at school and negative comments from
parents or students at closest school compared to their counterparts (Table 3).
3.5. Correlates of enrolment in the closest school
     In the univariate mixed e<U+FB00>ects binary logistic regression models, signi<U+FB01>cant correlates of the enrolment in the closest school were
co-education status of the school, sibling(s) enrolled in the same school, choosing school because siblings attended/attending the
same school, parents attended the same school, friend's enrolment, negative comments from parents and students at the closest
school, schools’ proximity to home, and the actual distance to school. In a multivariate analysis, positive correlates of enrolment in
the closest school were enrolment in a co-educational school (compared to enrolment in a single-sex school) and choosing school
because of its proximity to home whereas negative correlates included distance to school and negative comments from students at
closest school (Table 4). While not signi<U+FB01>cant in the fully adjusted multivariate model, the authors acknowledge a potential
relationship between proximity of the school to the students’ home, and the likelihood of friends, siblings and other family members
are attending or having attended the school.
4. Discussion
     This study examined factors associated with adolescents’ enrolment in the closest secondary school in the absence of school
zoning in the city of Dunedin, New Zealand, and its implications for active transport to school. Key <U+FB01>ndings of this study are: 1)
enrolling in the closest school was associated with three times higher rates of walking as a part of adolescents’ journey to school, <U+FB01>ve
times higher rates of traveling to school by active transport only and lower rates of reliance solely on motorised transport to school
compared to not enrolling in the closest school; 2) choosing school because of its proximity to home and existing social connections
were more frequently reported reasons for school choice among adolescents who enrolled in the closest school compared to their
counterparts; and 3) in the absence of school zoning, shorter distance to school, choosing school because of its proximity to home, co-educational status of the school and absence of negative peer feedback were associated with adolescents’ enrolment in the closest
secondary school. These <U+FB01>ndings emphasise the implications of school choice and school zoning policies not only for education but
also for public health, transport and environmental sustainability.
     School choice policies coexist in tension with policies aimed at increasing active transport (Ferrari and Green, 2013). Existing
evidence clearly shows the strong relationship between school choice policies, increased travel distances to school and decreased
rates of active transport (Wilson et al., 2010; Wilson et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2012). Previous studies used surveys (Marshall et al.,
2010; Wilson et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2012), GIS data (Wilson et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2012), distance calculations (Sirard et al.,
2015), observations (Sirard et al., 2015) and focus group discussions (Yang et al., 2012) to paint a clear portrait of the “side-e<U+FB00>ects of
school choice programs” (Wilson et al., 2007: 516). These side e<U+FB00>ects include increases in travel distance to school, tra<U+FB03>c congestion,
greenhouse gases and particulate emissions, along with decreased active transport for school children.
     Promoting active transport addresses public health goals of increased physical activity, societal interest in alternatives to
automobile transport and sustainability concerns. If feasible, active transport to school is a convenient way to maintain or increase
physical activity (Faulkner et al., 2009; Mendoza et al., 2011; Pabayo et al., 2012) and, in the long term, will contribute to improving
health and wellbeing of adolescents whose physical activity levels tend to decline with age (van Mechelen et al., 2000). Safety
concerns including tra<U+FB03>c danger (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017; Kerr et al., 2006; Mandic et al., 2017 Trapp et al., 2011) and concerns
about strangers (Carver et al., 2008) decrease the likelihood of active transport to school among children and adolescents. Increased
reliance on motorized transport to school increases the volume of tra<U+FB03>c on the roads, contributes to tra<U+FB03>c congestion around schools
at drop o<U+FB00> and pick up times and worsens parental and adolescents’ safety concerns for active transport, especially for cycling to
school (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017; Mandic et al., in press; Mandic et al., 2017).
     From public health and transport perspectives, the results of this study emphasise the importance of considering distance to school
in school choice decisions and in the design of education policy. In the present study, median distance to school for adolescents who
enrolled in the closest school was 4.0 km closer to school with 10 times more adolescents living within walkable distance to school
and 2.6 times more adolescents living within cycling distance to school compared to their counterparts. In addition, two-thirds of
those adolescents reported choosing school because of its proximity to home compared to 14% of their peers who did not enrol in the
closest school. Since distance to school is one of the strongest predictors of active transport to school (Davison et al., 2008; Mandic
et al., 2015a, 2015b; Panter et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2011), it is not surprising that in the present study adolescents
who enrolled in the closest school had three times higher rates of walking as a part of their journey to school, <U+FB01>ve times higher rates
of traveling to school using active transport only and lower rates of reliance solely on motorised transport to school compared to
adolescents who did not enrol in the closest school.
     Previous studies have also emphasised the importance of school's proximity (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2003) and
school choice (Wilson et al., 2010) for travel to school behaviour, particularly for walking and cycling, in primary school children.
Among parents of primary school children, more parents of children attending a neighbourhood school ranked the school's proximity
to home as a reason for school choice compared to parents whose children attended a distant (magnet) school (Wilson et al., 2010).
School choice led to longer commute and reduced rates of walking and cycling to school among primary school children in the United
States (Wilson et al., 2007). Although locating schools within high density neighbourhoods would lead to highest rates of active
transport to school due to proximity to children's homes, school location strategy could be counterbalanced by school zoning policy
that requires students to attend the closest school (Yang and Diez-Roux, 2013). However, a recent study that investigated a change in
school choice policy resulted in shorter distances to school but without an associated increase in the rates of active transport to school
(Sirard et al., 2015). These <U+FB01>ndings suggest that other policy levers and/or incentives (e.g. a policy-packaging approach Givoni, 2014;
Justen et al., 2014) may need to be included to achieve the desired e<U+FB00>ect.
     School choice policies include a number of aspects including charter schools, vouchers, magnet schools and de-zoning3 (Musset,
2012; Waslander et al., 2010). Charter schools have formed part of the choice landscape in the US since 1992 (Henig and MacDonald,
2002), but are a relative newcomer to the New Zealand school choice landscape (Ministry of Education, 2017). Currently there are no
charter schools in Dunedin, with all 10 charter schools located in the North Island of New Zealand. The relationship between charter
schools and active transport to school is unclear, as di<U+FB00>erent countries, states and school districts have di<U+FB00>erent policies in place with
regard to transport. For instance, Makarewicz (2013) found 40% of students attending charter schools in the urban school district of
Oakland, California were driven to school (1.6 times higher than students who attend a traditional public school) (p. 6); while other
studies excluded charter schools from their school choice analysis (Wilson et al., 2007). What is clear, however, is that many of the
options provided through school choice policies have the potential to increase the number of students who do not attend their
neighbourhood school and therefore decrease the rate of active transport to school (Yang et al., 2012). An important area for future
research is to expand the study of the impact of school choice on active transport to school to include the charter schools and other
selections on the school choice menu.
    Interventions to address transport-related greenhouse gas emissions and to improve local air quality often seek to reduce private
car transport and increase the uptake of active and public transport modes. A child's attendance at a school with close proximity to
home increases the likelihood of using active transport, and thereby reduce the amount of fuel burnt and associated emissions.
However, the complexity of school travel, including modal choice (Mitra, 2013) and parental trip-chaining (Buliung et al., 2011;
Marique et al., 2013), i.e. combining transport to school with travel to work or to achieve other tasks, needs to be better understood
when accounting for emissions-savings. For instance, the behavioural model of school transport presented by Mitra (2013) points to
the interrelationships between various aspects of the external context, urban environment, the household, the child, and travel
practices that will determine how a student will travel to school. Nevertheless, embedding social norms that promote physical activity
and the use of public transport modes, whilst reducing symbolic and a<U+FB00>ective motivations for motorised transport (Steg, 2005) may
have long term environmental bene<U+FB01>ts (Hopkins, 2016).
    In the absence of school zoning, multivariate correlates of the enrolment in the closest school were shorter distance to school,
choosing school because of its proximity to home, co-educational status of the school and absence of negative feedback from students.
These <U+FB01>ndings suggest that in addition to distance to school and perceived importance of school's proximity to home, co-educational
status of the school and social factors are important determinants of enrolment in the closest school. Our work suggests that co-educational status of the school is one of the most commonly reported reasons for school choice among Dunedin adolescents who
attended a co-educational school whereas a single-sex school status was not as frequently reported as a reason for school choice
among adolescents who attended single-sex schools (unpublished <U+FB01>ndings). Due to Dunedin's unique context, it is di<U+FB03>cult to <U+FB01>nd
comparable studies. For example, a study from the UK reported that child's gender in<U+FB02>uenced the parents’ choice (Jackson and Bisset,
2005). In that study, single-sex education was more frequently reported as an important factor a<U+FB00>ecting school choice decision among
parents of girls whereas preference for coeducational schooling was more frequently reported by parents of boys. For the parents in
that study, “the long-held view that single-sex education has advantages for girls whilst co-education has advantages for boys still
prevails” (Jackson and Bisset, 2005: 208). Another UK-based study that explored young people and adults’ perceptions and
preferences for single-sex schooling found very mixed responses, complicated by gender, ethnicity and faith. In the Dunedin sample
discussed in this paper, only non-integrated schools were included, removing religious a<U+FB03>liation from the complex set of factors
in<U+FB02>uencing school choice. Nonetheless, two thirds of adolescents attending a co-educational school chose such a school due to its co-educational status. School choice decisions driven by the desire to attend a co-educational school clearly warrant further study.
    In addition to consideration of the co-educational status of the school, school choice in Dunedin is related to a combination of the
school's facilities, positive feedback about schools and existing social connections, rather than perceived proximity of school to home
when analyses do not take into account whether students enrol in the closest school or not (unpublished <U+FB01>ndings). However, <U+FB01>ndings
from this study show that actual distance to school and perceived importance of school's proximity, but not school's facilities and
programs, play an important role in decisions to enrol in the closest school. Future studies should examine di<U+FB00>erences in factors that
in<U+FB02>uence school choice based on types of schools (private versus public; special character versus regular schools; co-educational
versus single-sex schools) and who makes school choice decision(s) (adolescents, parents or adolescents-and-parents together).
    In the present study, receiving negative comments from students at the closest school was associated with 1.5 times lower
likelihood of enrolling in the closest secondary school in Dunedin. This novel <U+FB01>nding suggests that negative feedback from students at
the closest school plays an important role in school choice decisions. Previous studies reported that parental school choice in New
Zealand is frequently driven by social factors such as characteristics of the school population, school's academic achievement,
reputation, environment, and safety (Gordon, 2015) rather than distance to school. Wilson et al. (2010) speculated that while parents
in the United States may prefer to send their children to a neighbourhood school, “magnet” schools may o<U+FB00>er other dimensions
(curriculum, academic quality and other factors) that suppress parental desire to send their child to the closest school. These <U+FB01>ndings
have important policy implications beyond transport to school (Wilson et al., 2010).
    In a complex school choice educational policy landscape where schools compete for students (Stubbs and Strathdee, 2012), there
are no simplistic solutions for attracting parents and students to the closest school. Given that parents and students frequently report
perceptions regarding the reputation (Reay and Lucey, 2000), quality (Phillippo and Gri<U+FB03>n, 2016) and academic achievement
(Sattin-Bajaj, 2014) of the school as important to the decision-making process, schools will need multifaceted approaches to address
these factors to increase enrolment from local students. Importantly, school choice alone will not improve school performance or
quality (Gordon, 2015), and thus will not attract students to attend their local school. Overall, however, the <U+FB01>nding that the e<U+FB00>ects of
distance were statistically signi<U+FB01>cant, even after adjustment for potential confounders in the multivariate model, lends credence to
the distance e<U+FB00>ects that extend beyond socioeconomic background and academic ability, a<U+FB00>ecting also young people's aspirations, as
previously reported among university students (Parker et al., 2016).
4.1. Implications for school choice policies
    Taken together, these <U+FB01>ndings have signi<U+FB01>cant implications for school zoning policies in New Zealand and elsewhere. In addition
to their e<U+FB00>ects on education, school zoning policies have also substantial implications for addressing physical inactivity and health of
adolescents, increased reliance on motorised transport, tra<U+FB03>c congestion around schools, safety of active transport to school, air
quality and greenhouse gas emissions (U.S. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2003; Wilson et al., 2010). School choice policies
should evaluate environmental, budgetary and transport mode choice implications, including children's physical activity, health and
wellbeing, cost of private vehicle operation and transport infrastructure, and greenhouse gas emissions (Marshall et al., 2010; Wilson
et al., 2010). Quantifying these “secondary e<U+FB00>ects” emphasise the broad implications of the school choice policy and its impact on
other sectors (Wilson et al., 2010).
    To maximise the rates of active transport to school, the school locations should be evenly distributed in space and children should
be assigned to the closest school (Yang and Diez-Roux, 2013), which would require greater collaboration between the Ministry of
Education, and local and regional planners (McDonald, 2010). In addition, school zoning policies have other consequences including
implications for house pricing in school areas and reinforcing class/wealth structures that require critical attention to ensure
inequalities are not perpetuated or increased (West, 2006). To reduce the tensions between parental school choice expectations that
“‘getting the right school or education for my child is worth driving for” (Yang et al., 2012, p. 1870) and the goal of increasing active
transport to school may take a great deal more coordination between educational policy makers, town planners, health promoters,
and community groups.
4.2. Study limitations
    This study has several limitations. The cross-sectional design prevents claims about causality. This study examined school choice
only in non-integrated public secondary schools without school zoning (six out of twelve (50%) Dunedin secondary schools) which
limits generalisability of <U+FB01>ndings for school choice across the entire city (including integrated (“special character”) schools with
enrolment schemes). The unique setting of Dunedin itself may limit generalisability of <U+FB01>ndings to other New Zealand cities and other
countries with di<U+FB00>erent school choice culture and school zoning policies. Finally, parental perspectives on school choice have not
been addressed in this article. Despite the limitations, this study has notable strengths. The strengths include consideration of
adolescents’ perspective on school choice, use of a comprehensive survey of factors a<U+FB00>ecting school choice, a large representative
sample of adolescents from one city in New Zealand, 100% school participation and selection of non-integrated public schools
without school zoning requirements. Future studies should examine the e<U+FB00>ects of closest school enrolment on the rates of active and
motorised transport to school if school zoning policies were introduced and students enrolled into their closest school.
5. Conclusions
    In the absence of school zoning, shorter distance to school, choosing a school because of its proximity to home, co-educational
school status, and absence of negative peer feedback were associated with adolescents’ enrolment in the closest secondary school.
Policies that incentivise enrolment in the closest school could increase the rates of active transport and may contribute to addressing
negative and life-long health impacts arising from physical inactivity among adolescents, as well as tra<U+FB03>c congestion and
sustainability concerns. Nevertheless, the unintended consequences of such policies including implications for house pricing in school
areas and reinforcing class/wealth structures need to be considered. These <U+FB01>ndings have implications for planning decisions about
the construction of new schools and renovation of the existing schools since the school location and consequently distance to school
have signi<U+FB01>cant implications for transport and health. Planning decisions should also consider the importance of infrastructure (e.g.
walking tracks, bike paths) that support active transport between homes and schools. In addition, if active transport to school is not
feasible due to distance, adolescents should be encouraged to use active transport to other destinations. A multi-sector approach and
extensive collaboration between educational policy makers, urban designers, health promoters, and community groups is required to
reduce the tensions between parental and students’ school choice expectations of getting the best education possible and the goal of
increasing rates of active transport to school.