Patterns of children’s travel to school,
their body weight, spatial factors,
and perceptions: A survey on nine
European cities

Abstract: Increasing rates of body weight of children has become a motivation for
investigating active transportation to school during the past years. Lack of proper data
covering different geographical contexts is a problem seen in the literature of this subject. The
present paper reports the findings of a recent survey on nine cities in seven European
countries funded by the European Commission. The objective of the survey was to provide
data covering several topics in relation with active commuting to school and body mass index,
such as parental perceptions of safety and security, neighborhood facilities, land use
characteristics, etc. in different regions of Europe in a way that cross-sectional comparisons
between regions and city sizes is facilitated. For that, 2735 children/parents were handed out
questionnaires, from whom 1424 filled out the questionnaires (response rate: 52%). This led
to 1304 validated questionnaires. The respondents studied in 21 elementary schools of Foggia,
Italy; Berlin, Germany; Thessaloniki, Greece; Rijeka, Croatia; Utrecht, The Netherlands; Lódz,
Poland; Konstantynow, Poland; Malatya, Turkey, and Dogansehir, Turkey as of March 2016
until January 2017. The survey instrument enables development of continuous and categorical
variables for empirical research with strong focus on the built environment using the aggregate
data provided by this study. It is expected that the output data eases production of knowledge
about less-studied European contexts as well as cross-sectional comparison of results with
more studied areas of Western Europe.

1. Introduction
This research report summarizes the results of a
survey on the topic of active transport to school,
the built environment characteristics, the per-
ceptions of parents and children, and finally
children’s body weight in the European context.
The survey was conducted from March 2016 until
January 2017 in nine European cities. The ne-
cessity of conducting this survey lies in the
knowledge gaps identified in the European
studies (Masoumi 2017), including (1) associa-
tions between the perceptions and mobility be-
haviors of parents and children concerning
barriers of Active Transport to School (ATS), (2)
additional research on the associations of ATS-
Body Mass Index (BMI) to add to the consistency
of international results, (3) contextual studies on
the ATS-BMI topic with adding the less-studied
contexts to the European studies, (4) studies on
the behaviors of children without bringing in the
adolescents or vice versa, (5) integration of built
environment variables in ATS-BMI studies.

The overall objective of this survey is to collect
data and information about the patterns of
school travels of 9-12-year-old children, the out-
door-activity-related perceptions of children and
their parents, as well as the children’s body
weight in the European context. It meant to pro-
vide data covering several topics in relation with
active commuting to school and body mass index,
such as parental perceptions of safety and
security, neighborhood facilities, land use charac-
terristics, etc. in different regions of Europe in a
way that cross-sectional comparisons between
regions and city sizes is facilitated. The structure
of the survey instrument facilitates comparisons
between cities and regions located in far-away
locations throughout Europe. This survey was
designed to address some of the identified know-
ledge gaps identified (Masoumi 2017), including
(1) providing subjective data in order to examine
the attitudes and perceptions of both children
and their parents concerning safety, security, and
mobility; (2) providing data for mathematical
analyses and models that can confirm or reject
the correlations between ATS and BMI so that
consistency of overall results is increased by con-
firming the results of one of the two sides; (3)
collecting data about less-studied European

countries like Croatia, Poland, Greece, and
Turkey, as well as relatively studied contexts such
as Germany, Netherlands, and Italy, so that con-
ditions of comparison is established; (4) collecting
data focusing only on children; (5) providing data
by means of secondary data and map work about
built environment so that the correlations bet-
ween urban form, ATS, and BMI are more thorou-
ghly investigated.
This paper continues with a methodological re-
view of the European and international surveys
on the relevant topics. Then the technical aspects
of the survey methodology are presented in a
way that other researchers can make use of them
or can reproduce them. The findings are illustra-
ted in a collective way by means of tables, and
finally the findings are discussed with special
regards to the knowledge gaps addressed in this
manuscript.


2. Similar Previous Surveys

The following surveys have been conducted with
the aim of providing data for studying children’s
mobility patterns and their body weight in
different contexts. Comparable previous surveys
have been done in several countries, most of
which are industrial high-income ones. The
examples are briefly explained here. In order to
study the parental perceptions traffic dangers of
children’s mobility to school and the effects of
the built environment, Rothman et al. (2015)
undertook a self-administered survey gathering
the data of 733 pupils of 20 elementary school in
Toronto, Canada. Their main aim was to examine
the associations between frequent walking to
school for 4 to 5 times per week and parents <U+202B><U+05F3><U+202C>
perceptions of traffic risk, as well as correlations
between what parents perceive about high levels
of school route traffic danger and social and built
environment characteristics. The response rate of
this study was 38%. With the aim of finding
associations of ATS and children’s obesity, ano-
ther Canadian study was done on 315 pupils of
both sexes in grades 4 to 6 in Eastern Ontario
applying self-reported questionnaires, while the
measurements were done by the research team
using a portable stadiometer (Larouche et al.
2011). Before that, a larger survey had been done
in Quebec with the same data collection approach 

on 1170 children in kindergarten to grade 2
with both sexes (Pabayo et al. 2010). The data
collection of this study was undertaken in 1997
and 1998 leading to publication of longitudinal
results in 2010. This study meant to find the
correlations of active school commuting with
changes in BMI in children with 6 to 8 years of
age.
The surveys done in the USA have a larger share,
exemplified by four studies in this paper:
Rosenberg et al. (2006) studied the 924 children
with both sexes in 5th grade in seven suburban
elementary schools in California back in 1990-
1992 to find potential benefits of active school
transport on measures of weight status and
physical activity. Heelan et al. (2005) collected
the data of 320 boys and girls in eight rural
schools in Nebraska to find out if active
commuting provides sufficient physical activity to
affect BMI, and if it contributes to attainment of
physical activity recommendations. In this study,
the questionnaires were sent to students’ houses,
while the body measurements were done by the
research staff. In 2005, Fulton et al. published the
results of their study on 1458 children/young-
sters in grades 4 to 12 based on a nation-wide
survey done in 1996 by random digit-dial house-
hold survey and computer-assisted telephone
interviews. A more recent study was conducted
by Mendoza et al. (2014) based on longitudinal
data collections in 1998-2004 on 12022 children.
In order to explore the associations of active
transport to and from kindergarten with fifth-
grade adiposity, the body measurements were
done by staff using Shorr board and Seca digital
scale
European countries have also their share. The
example of these studies have been done in
Sweden (Chillón et al. 2012) in 1998-2005, who
collected the longitudinal data of 262 children of
both sexes aged 9 to 15 using computerized self-
reported questionnaires, as well as a newer study
done in Norway based on the data collected in
2005-2006 from 2299 children of 9 to 15 years of
age in 40 elementary schools and 23 high schools
(Ostergaard et al. 2013). The Swedish study
aimed to test whether modes of commuting to
school and changes in commuting were associ-
ated with 6-year changes in youth, while the

Norwegian one targeted correlations between
body composition, cardiorespiratory and muscu-
lar fitness with school trip modes in children and
adolescents. In 2007, data about walking and
cycling habits of 2012 children including 899 boys
and 1113 girls in Norfolk, UK, as well as the built
environment around children’s homes were
collected. GIS were applied to quantify the urban
form and distances to schools around homes,
while the school environments were assessed by
an audit developed especially for the research
(Panter et al. 2010). This study aimed to find
objective relations between characteristics of the
neighborhood, route, and school environments
on the one side and active transport to school
among children. The Spanish situation was
examined by a study published in 2015
(Gutiérrez-Zornoza et al.) based on the survey
done in 2006 in Cuenca, Spain, collecting data
about 956 children including 472 boys and 484
girls studying in 18 public schools in rural areas
for cross-sectional study. This data collection was
undertaken to investigate the role of distance to
school as well as associations of ATS and
children’s health.
Such surveys have not been limited to the high-
income countries. A limited number of data
collection activities have also been executed in
some of the developing and emerging countries,
two of which are briefly explained below. In order
to examine associations of parental psychological
and socio-economic factors and the built
environment with primary school children’s
school trip mode choice in Rasht, Iran, and the
connections with land use and psychological
issues, Mehdizadeh et al. (2016) conducted a
survey on pupils of nine primary public and
private schools in 2014. With a response rate of
80%, 735 questionnaires were filled out. An
example of the Chinese surveys is the work done
by Sun et al. (2015), who did a large data
collection on 21596 children and adolescents
(9445 boys and 12151 girls) of 1st to 12th grades
in eight cities of China, of whom 21280 students
had Body Mass Index information. This survey
was done in 2010 to investigate school travel
mode choices and associations with physical and
mental well-being among Chinese children. There
are also studies covering more than one country,
such as the work done by Sarmiento et al. (2015)

on 6797 students of 9 to 11 years of both sexes in
15 cities located in Australia, Brazil, Canada,
China, Colombia, Finland, India, Kenya, Portugal,
South Africa, UK, and USA, that was done to find
the possible associations between Body Mass
Index z-score, obesity, percentage body fat, waist
circumference with active commuting to school.
A summary of the main characteristics of the data
collections explained in this section can be found
in Table 1).

3. Methodology

The structure of the survey and the findings are
in a way that it enables researchers to do cross-
sectional studies using both continuous and
dichotomous variables. Hence, using the findings
several statistical analysis methods including
regression and discrete choice models may be
applied. The geographical distribution of case-
study cities in Europe are in a way that it can
provide a good coverage to most parts of the
continent. Less represented areas are Scandi-
navia, British Isles, Iberian Peninsula, and the
Commonwealth of Independent States. More-
over, the questions were formulated by in-depth
review of the existing literature, so the responses
are considered to be able to provide answers to a
wide range of issues regarding the built environ-
ment, mobility, and the body characteristics. The
findings are divided into two groups of the direct
findings of the survey, and the data provided
based on the urban form of the surrounding of
the schools. The former group of findings are
disaggregated data, while the latter are aggre-
gate based on the 3*3 km rectangular catchment
areas around the schools.
This survey was conducted with the assumption
that samples with subjects more than 1000 can
provide better power. The sample size of the
study (N=1304) was more than a number of
similar studies (i.e. Rosenberg et al. 2006; Yeung
et al. 2008; Pabayo et al. 2010; Larouche et al.
2011; Chillón et al. 2012; Gutiérrez-Zornoza et al.
2015; Rothman et al. 2015; Mehdizadeh et al.
2016). Thus, it is expected that better inclusive-
ness of data can be provided by a larger sample.
This is a finding of a recent systematic review of
English-language journal paper published bet-
ween 2005 and 2015 with the topic of active

transport to school and children’s body weight
(Masoumi 2017).
The eight survey cities examined in this survey
were Foggia, Italy; Berlin, Germany; Thessaloniki,
Greece; Rijeka, Croatia; Utrecht, The Nether-
lands; Lódz, Poland; Konstantynow, Poland;
Malatya, Turkey, and Dogansehir, Turkey. Table 2
summarizes the case-study information regarding
population and city size. For the above city size
categorization, the classification of (Dühr 2005) is
applied: cities with population of more than
1000000 are major cities, cities with between
500000 and one million inhabitants as large
cities, those with between 250000 and 500000
inhabitants as small cities, and finally areas with
less than 250000 residents as micro cities.
Like land use, locations of schools in districts with
very different socio-cultural and economic status
and background was intended so that a better
variability of factors related to socio-economics,
namely household average monthly income and
costs, were extracted. High levels of socio-
economic variability were intended for better
statistical modeling. The schools were selected
from the elementary schools so that the intended
ages of 9 to 12 were reached. The obligation of
having this age limitation in this study was
because this research was a part a larger project
with the aim of designing practice methods and
research and development tools for training and
sport practicing as well as promotion of the
physical activity of children in European cities.
The survey instrument was a self-reported
questionnaire that collected raw data about
children’s body measurements and the mobility
habits of children and their parents as well as
their perceptions toward safety and security. 26
questions were designed in a two-page
questionnaire. The parents were the main
respondents. They were asked to fill out the
questionnaires with presence of their children in
school or at home. The questions were
embedded in four sections: individual/household
information, parent’s travel habits, travel to
school, and finally perceptions of the school
travel routes. Most of the questions were
formulated for collecting qualitative data in form
of categorical divisions.

The selected schools were samples of popula-
tions as small as 567 nine-to-twelve-year-old
children in Konstantynow, Poland to a large po-
pulation of 110918 children in Berlin (Supplement
1). The data of children in 21 schools were
collected, in a way that they were located in
different urban structures in a certain city.
Different urban fabrics such as compact urban
forms in the central cities, lower-density
suburban areas, different street network
configurations like complete or semi-complete
grids, housing characteristics like high-rise buil-
dings, detached or semi-detached houses, etc.
were the basis of providing diversity and
variability of land uses.
The survey instrument was not exactly similar to
any of the studies addressed in the background,
methodology, and discussion sections of this
paper, but it was attempted to highlight to most
important aspects of the issues related to the
topic of active school commuting and body
weight.      Supplement        2    illustrates      the
questionnaire in English. The questionnaire was
structured primarily in English and was translated
to local languages.
Four large variable categories were employed to
accommodate different factors. These factors
were selected based on literature review and
identification of knowledge gaps. The variables
were designed in a way that the main factors in
previous studies were repeated and also some
less studied phenomena like perceptions and
spatial issues were integrated into the question-

naire. It was also tried to keep the survey
instrument as brief as possible. Below the
variables and their categories are explained. The
variables were designed to explore new insights
to the urban form characteristics around schools
and the body mass index of children in different
contexts, the inter-relations of the perceptions of
travel behaviors of children and parents, the
differences between the levels of active
commuting to school in different European
contexts, and the necessary or useful intervene-
tions in the built environment for promotion of
active transport to school. However, some
variables were designed to answer smaller pieces
of questions.
Demographic and socio-economic variables
The source of these data is the questionnaire.
These variables are related to the characteristics
of children and their family status. Their age has
been 9, 10, 11, or 12. The gender was assumed to
be male or female. The financial indicators are
the variables that were the most difficult data to
collect from families. If only household income
would be taken as a variable, then the real
purchase power would not be indicated in the
analyses. Socio-demographic factors (Cao et al.
2009; Soltanzadeh & Masoumi 2014) as well as
economic issues (Heinen & Chatterjee 2015;
Roque & Masoumi 2016) may be determinants
of mobility decision and habits of adults. With the
possible connections between the mobility
decisions of adults and their children as well as
between children’s mobility and their health, it
can be expected that socioeconomics and
demographics may be of importance for studying
pupils’ mobility and body weight. The target
variables of this group were age, gender, weight
and height (accordingly obesity, overweight, and
BMI), household size, number of children,
household members working, and household
costs/income ratio.

Travel variables
The source of these data is the questionnaire.
The first part of these variables is related to
parent’s travels. Five Variables were related to
commuting habits of both parents and children.

Car ownership and household members holding a
driving license are basically continuous but it was
possible to make them categorical where
necessary. The other four variables are categori-
cal from the beginning. The questions of this part
were design to develop variables about car
ownership, driving license ownership, father’s
mode choice, mother’s mode choice, shopping in
neighbourhood, and entertainment in neighbour-
hood. For simplification of data collection about
families, it was assumed that children have
fathers and mothers. Those children that had
mother and mother or father and father, could
give the travel information of one of them. This
was also the case for children with only one living
parent. The second series of variables related to
travels are variables of travel to school. The
variables related to school travel are categorical
except two of them: the distance between from
the nearest intersection to home and school,
which is continuous at the first step, but can be
changed to dichotomous variable later. One of
the most desirable potential variables targets
persons who accompany the student to school. In

the last option of this question, “siblings” are put
together with “close relatives”, which means
grandparents and uncles/aunts, as well as
“others”, which refers to those who may help the
family take their children to school such as family
friends, neighbors, and family helpers like
nannies and housekeepers. The second question
providing continuous data sought the number of
crossings between home and school. This refers
to crossing streets of all types and targets
objective measures of road safety. Variables
about Distance of travel to school, school travel
mode choice, accompanying the child to school,
child bike ownership, and number of crossings
between home and school were sought.

Perceptions of the school travels
The source of these data is the questionnaire.
Categorical data regarding perceptions of both
parents and children applying five-point Likert
scale were collected as a part of this section.
Complementary information about the meaning
“safety” and “security” are given to surveyors and
respondents in survey guidelines, though in
several languages there is only one word for

these two meanings. The research team in all
countries were in contact with the school
authorities and sometimes directly with parents,
so if the teachers and authorities or the parents
had questions, the team gave further explana-
tions. The goal was that during the preliminary
negotiations with schools, enough description of
the goals and methods of the survey were
provided for them so that they can better
transfer them to parents. It was attempted that
the explanations of research staff can clarify the
issue for the respondents. The parents were set
free to fill out the questionnaires at school or at
home, but they were asked to fill them out
together with children, since two of the questions
targeted the perceptions and feelings of the
children. The data of this section were meant to
be used for variables about student safety
perception, student security perception, family
safety perception, family security perception,
perception of quality of sidewalks, and
perception of quality of bike routes.

Spatial variables

The development methods of some of the
variables in this group are mainly similar to those
applied by (Sallis et al. 2016) (connectivity,
accessibility to public transportation, population
density, and neighborhood green space). In order
to quantify urban form variables, computer-
based work like Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) were not used. Instead, these quantifica-
tions were conducted manually using the
secondary statistics, the sources of which are
presented in Supplement 1, as well as the online
maps like Google Maps. The bases of estimations
are catchment areas made by 3*3 km² rectangles
centered by each school. Since ATS is includes not
only walking but also bicycling, pedestrian sheds
of 800 meters or similar measures were not
applied1. Instead, larger areas were taken so that
bicycle travels from home to school can also be
investigated. For simplifying the calculations by
all partners, rectangles were taken instead of the
conventional circular catchment areas. Rectan-
gles of nine km² were employed to calculate the
urban form variables. In cases that the school
were located on the edge of the city, the city was
so small that a part of the catchment area

remained unbuilt, or there were a water body like
see, river, etc., the unbuilt area was distracted
from the nine km². Thus, in some cases the
catchment area was less than nine km² and the
urban form variables have been proportionally
changed. Open/green spaces are small or large
open neighborhood spaces, in which children can

play or pass time together with or without
parents. Such spaces can in some cases be very
small pieces of land like small playgrounds. City
size is one of the factors examined in this study.
The last variable is the population of the pilot
cities, in which the schools are located. The
populations may be related to different years,
but all of them are from the recent three or four
years. The connectivity of street networks was
calculated by dividing the number of all types of
intersections     (primary,     secondary,        etc.)
intersections in the school neighborhood by the
area. Accessibility to public transportation was
estimated by dividing the number of public
transport stations (bus, rail, etc.) by population
multiplied by 1000. Population density was
calculated by dividing the population in the
catchment area centered by the school by area in
hectare (in most of the cases: 9 km²).
Neighborhood open/green space was estimated
by counting the number of public spaces like
urban parks or other spaces in the school
neighborhood/district. Finally, the city size was
presented by the raw population data derived
from census data of the partner countries.
The survey has been conducted as an exploratory
approach to the topic of ATS and children’s body
weight. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to
have an understanding about the levels of
representativeness of the data collection. For
estimating the representativeness of this survey,
availability of the statistics related to the
population of comparable children with the same
age class in the pilot cities was a key figure.
Collecting this data was difficult in most of the
study cities. Hence, in some cases a rough
estimation of the population of 9 to 12-year
children has been provided by our research team.
Supplement 1 shows these figures with further
descriptions regarding the method of estimation
in cases that the exact populations were not
available.

This study takes the formulation developed by
(Cochran 1963, 75) for the purpose of examining
sample size. There are two formulations for this
aim:

Whereas Z² is the abscissa of the normal curve, p
is the estimated proportion of an attribute, e is
the level of precision, and finally q is equal to 1-p.
The result is adjusted by the following relation

Whereas n is the sample size (number of valid
filled questionnaires shown in Suppl. 6).

In Supplement 1, the value of e is shown based
on the sample sizes in different cities, where N is
the population of children with 9 to 12 years of
age presented in the fourth column of the table.
In calculation of sample rations, the confidence
level has been 95%. Concerning representa-
tiveness, it should be mentioned that the ratios,
precisions, and in general representativeness
written in Supplement 1 refers only to the cities
not the countries. Small data collections in three
schools cannot be a good representative of a
country.       However,        the       levels     of
representativeness can be estimated by the
precisions, e.g. the descriptive statistics found for
the city of Rijeka, Croatia, can be 6.69% more or
less than the actual amounts of that city.

The response rates are calculated by dividing the
sum of valid questionnaires and the loss by the
number of the handed-out questionnaires.
Supplements 1 and 3 reflect the response rates of
each school, city, country, and finally the
European sample. The response rates were
calculated by dividing the responded question-
naires by the number of the non-responded
questionnaires. Thus, the amount of loss did not
affect the response rates. While in Greece,
Croatia, and Turkey the response rates were as
high as 85-100 percent, some of other countries
Germany and the Netherlands had the normal
rates of 20-30 percent. The overall response rate

was calculated to be 52.07 percent, which seems
normal and acceptable for such a sample
distributed in different countries.
According to Supplement 3, 120 questionnaires
were considered as loss and were eliminated
from the survey results because they had some
deficien-cies such as more than one option
selected for some important questions. The final
validated or corrected questionnaires were 1304
in all case-study cities. For being informed about
the missing data related to each question, the
readers can refer to Supplement 4, where the
number of valid and unanswered questions by
respon-dents have been pointed out.
Five major urban form variables are meant to be
developed for the future research, namely
connectivity, accessibility to public transporta-
tion, accessibility to public/open spaces, popula-
tion density, and city size. The method of variable
development related to these indicators have
been explained in Supplement 3. The data
needed for these indicators, were provided by
working on Google Maps, or using secondary
census data. Here more information on the
methods applied are offered.

Street network connectivity is an urban form
variable that is considered to be a motivator of
active travels, including walking and bicycling, i.e.
more connected street networks are possible to
encourage children and their parents for walking
and biking to school. For estimating street
connectivity, the number of street intersections
were estimated by means of Google Maps. Every
crossroad made by streets of any type, including
main, secondary, or smaller allies within the
catchment areas of rectangular 3*3 km zones
centered by schools were manually counted. The
estimated number of intersections were divided
by the area of the catchment area, which was in
most cases 9 km². The exceptions were the cases,
in which the pilot cities were located on see
shore (Rijeka, HR) or the schools were located on
the edge of the city (Doganshehir, TR). In such
cases, the number of intersections were divided
by an area smaller than 9 km². Using the
information offered by the website ÖPNVKARTE
(http://www.öpnvkarte.de/), the location and
number of public transportation stations within
the catchment areas around schools were

identified. The public transport stations include
both bus stops and urban rail stations like U-Bahn
in Berlin. The accessibility to public transport is
assumed to have effect on public transport use of
children, which is not an active transport mode.
In case of Berlin, the location and number of
public transport stations were collected from the
website of Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe-BVG
(http://fahrinfo.bvg.de/Fahrinfo/bin/query.bin/d
n?&ujm=1). The stations of all pilot cities were
found on the above website, except the ones in
Turkey and in Lódz, Poland. As a result, Turkish
and Polish colleagues, manually counted the bus
stops around the three schools.
As seen in the literature, presence of public
open/green spaces such as playgrounds and large
or local urban parks has influence on outdoor PA2
of children. It may also be linked to ATS. Hence, it
has been tried to collect data about this availa-
bility within the surroundings of the schools.
Four counting them, Google Maps has been the
basis. All types of public spaces that may be used
by children, for playing, passing time with friends
or alone, and walking/biking have been counted
on the online maps. Again, the basis was the
catchment areas of 3*3 km².

Population density is one of the most important
indicators of urban form measured in this survey.
The population residing in the catchment areas
around schools were estimated by each partner
separately. In Berlin, the population was estima-
ted using free GIS materials including small
statistical blocks located in the rectangular zones
around schools. In Foggia, Italy, a share of the city
population proportional to the areas of the zones
was allocated to the catchment areas. Other
partner cities took used data for calculating the
populations. For that local demographic census
data of the recent years was adopted.
City size refers to the population accommodated
in the administrative urban boundaries of the
pilot cities. Based on the secondary demographic
data, it can be said if the pilot cities are major,
large, small, or micro. Only the population of the
cities have been used for this purpose, and the
inhabitants of suburban areas (metropolitan
populations) have not been considered; e.g., the
urban population of Berlin City is 3.5 million,
while it increases to about 4.2 million, when

bringing in the suburban residents. In this study,
only 3.5 million inhabitants have been allocated
to Berlin.
The results of this data collection facilitates a
cross-sectional study such as comparisons
between different counties and regions, but
there is still work to be done for providing a more
rigorous survey providing ground for longitudinal
studies. Since the time duration of the funding
received from the European Commission was
limited to two years, only a part of which was
used for collecting data, there were no time for
undertaking a follow up survey examining the
changes in children’s mobility patterns and body
mass index or effective interventions. Lack of
longitudinal studies are clear when reviewing the
related literature. Due to difficulties and

4. Findings
The dataset provided by this study fulfills the five
objectives of this research that stem from five
gaps in the existing knowledge about children’s
mobility and health. The surveys in seven
countries provided data about only children with
a narrow range of ages (excluding adolescents)
with focus on less-studied European contexts as
well as providing variables of land use and
perceptions of parents and children. With this
view, the below-explained findings succeeded to
provide data for future studies with a strong
focus on inter-contextual comparisons highlight-
ing the differences in geography, culture, and

expenses of doing such data collections, only a
limited number of surveys such as Rosenberg et
al. (2006), Pabayo et al. (2010), Chillón et al.
(2012), and Mendoza & Liu (2014) have provided
longitudinal data. In future attempts, providing
data follow-up data from the target schools will
be ambitious. Moreover, combining self-
administered questionnaires with instrumental
measurement of body composition such as skin
thickness can have good results so that the
observations about children’s body are not
limited to the reported weight and height. This
combination was not planned for the present
survey due to limitations related to funding,
expertise of the team, and budget.
                                         
climate. The findings of the survey are presented
in two groups. The first part is related to
continuous data. The findings of this part are
shown in Table 3, where mean, standard
deviation, minimum, and maximum are reflected.
The breakdown of the data based on city are
seen in Supplement 5. No comparison between
the cities have been made in these presentations,
and only raw data were input in them. The
questions formulated in form of categorical and
dummy data are collected in Supplement 6. The
findings of this table include both city-level data
and the overall findings of the sample of nine
cities.

Except one question (average monthly household
costs) all the questions were answered by more
than 1000 child/parents and several of them
were fully answered (N=1304). Average monthly
household income and costs were the two most
difficult questions to get response about. This is
in line with many other surveys. The monthly
household ranged from 11553€ in Utrecht, NL to
896€ in Konstantynow, PL. These figures can be
telling about the mobility attitudes of families,
but a better indicator can be income divided by
costs. By calculating this figure, the results will be
more useful for findings associations. If so the
proportion of income to costs in Utrecht will be
6.82, while it is 1.26. High income to cost ratio is
also seen in Berlin with a proportion of 2.02.
The typical child of this sample was a 10-11-year-
old with a weight of about 40 kg and a height of
about 140 cm. The houses of the sample located
554 meters away from the schools separated by
an average of 4.4 junctions. 45% (readers can find
the exact figures in the tables) of the households
of the sample have four members in their
households, which results to 50% with two
children. An average of 1.46 persons work
outside of the house, which indicates that one
person works outside in 44% of households and
two persons work in 48% of them. Interestingly,
43% of the children of the sample are not
accompanied by anyone on the way to school.
This is why 58% of them walk to school as the
most dominant commuting mode amongst other
choices.
Secondary data were collected in a way that four
urban form variables can be developed.
Supplement 7 shows the results of the
estimations of urban form characteristics based
on the methodology explained above. All four
developed variables are expected to have
positive effects (if significant) according to the
literature.

5. Discussion

The overall sample shows higher share of active
transportation (58% walking and 8% bicycling)
compared to a number of previous surveys. In the
sample of Sarmiento et al. (2015) 37% of children
walked and 4.9% biked to school (see Table 1).
20% difference in walking rates may be because

of the contexts of studies. they conducted their
data collection in several countries with diverse
cultures. The resulted mode choices are also
higher than that of DeWeese & Ohri-Vachaspati
(2015) (47% walking in a sample in New Jersey,
USA), Mendoza & Liu (2014) (9% general active
commuting in the USA), Ostergaard et al. (2013)
(49% walking and 4% bicycling in a Norwegian
sample), (Larouche et al. 2011) (Canadian
sample), Yeung et al. (2008) (34% general active
transportation in Australia), Rosenberg et al.
(2006) (20% in California, USA), (Heelan et al.
2005) (36% active commuting in Nebraska, USA),
and Fulton et al. (2005) (11% walking and 3%
biking in the USA). However, the findings of this
study about the rates of active transportation of
children are approximately equal or less than
those of Chillón et al. (2012) (35% to 54% walking
and 12% to 31% biking in Sweden) and Gutiérrez-
Zornoza et al. (2015) (70% in Cuenca, Spain). In
general, the findings about the active commuting
rates seem in line with the previous surveys,
particularly when it is considered that commuting
circumstances are often under the influence of
culture, geography, and climate (refer to Table 1
for a summary of the discussed publications).
These factors may cause inter or intra-contextual
differences in active commuting to school or
health conditions. In other words, the levels of
active commuting and physical activity of children
may be significantly different not only between
socio-cultural, geographical, and climatic con-
texts, but also inside them between different
groups. Recent research shows that factors
related to children’s active transportation and
health are not limited to the built environment,
mobility decisions, lifestyles, and perceptions, but
also climate (Kallio et al. 2016) and the socio-
economic status (Duncan et al. 2008) inside a
specified context can be important. Anyhow, the
inter-contextual mismatches have not completely
been investigated and need more examinations.
That is true also for different contexts of Europe.
This data collection provides a basis for future
publications for finding out more about these
contextual inquiries.
The findings of this survey reveal sheds light on
appealing topics related to the differences in the
mobility and body weight of children in different
European cities and regions. A quick scanning of

the results in Supplement 6 shows some of these
subjects. An example the difference seen by a
first glance between some cities with high
personal car use as the main school commuting
mode such as Foggia (35%), Konstantynow (25%),
and Thessaloniki (29%). Car use in these cities can
be compared to that of cities with better urban
development such as Berlin (11%) and Utrecht
(10%) or cities with warmer weather and perhaps
different culture such as Malatya (8%),
Dogansehir (7%), and Rijeka (6%). The role of
urban development can be seen in neighborhood
shopping facilities in better-developed cities: 40%
of parents in Berlin and 48.8% in Utrecht shop in
their own neighborhood. The amount of parents
satisfied with the neighborhood walking and
biking facilities in Utrecht are much higher than
other cities. These may have significant
correlation with children’s walking and biking to
school. Preliminary scanning of the findings
shows other interesting points that may
significantly cause contextual differences in
mobility habits and, as a result, in body weight:
the percentage of mothers working are hugely
different in different contexts. The percentage of
mothers who do not work or do not commute is
really small in some of the southern cities such as
Malatya, Dogansehir, and Thessaloniki compared
to northern cities. This may be a significant
determinant of children’s commuting mode.
Neighborhood safety and security have also
points to tell us: in some cities like Dogansehir,
children as well as their parents have sense of
lack of safety and security, but still they largely
walk to school (82.9%). This may be because of
lack of alternative modes for them. The role of
parental perceptions of safety and security can
be observed in the number of children traveling
to school independently. No meaningful
differences are identified that can be connected
to the regions or climates; in Berlin, Rijeka,
Malatya, and Dogansehir higher percentages of
children go to school independently while this
figure is lower in Utrecht by surprise. The role of
cultures and economics can be seen in a number
of issues, i.e. children’s bike ownership in
northern cities is considerably higher than the
southern areas. All of the sample children in
Utrecht, 94% in Berlin, 94% in Konstantynow, and
97% in Lodz have bicycles. In the south, this

percentage is lower. Another point that catches
attention in the first look to the findings is that
the distance to school is not related to the size of
the cities (Supplement 5). The above general
observations need to be statistically tested in
future investigations.
In the empirical studies following this data
collection, the similarities and differences
between mobility patterns, perceptions, and
weight-related issues within the observed cities
and countries of this survey will be statistically
tested. The role of contextuality should receive
more attention in these studies.

6. Conclusion

This study provides numerical and categorical
data regarding the mobility patterns of children
on the way to school and back home, the
perceptions of safety and security, the physical
environment, and the effects of all of the above
the body weight of 9 to 12-year-old children in
Europe. This data collection program has benefits
such as a good distribution of geographical
contexts throughout the continent. The
consistency of the survey structure in all
countries enables comparative studies about the
topic between the regions and cultures. The
context specificity of the topic and extreme
dependence to cultures and sub-cultures is
probable but not so many studies have focused
on this subject. The example of such studies has
been done by Larouche et al. (2015), who showed
the characteristics of active transport to school
may differ in different cultures, so the
interventions should not be uniform in all areas
and regions. This hypothesis can be tested by the
findings of this survey, not only about the
characteristics of active commuting, but also
about other targets of the questionnaires such as
perceptions of safety and security as well as the
effectiveness of urban form, accessibility, and the
distances to schools.
The preliminary descriptive analysis of the
findings gives the researchers of this survey that
this specificity may be present in several points
that have not been thoroughly examined in
previous investigations. Thus using the results of
this data collection, it will be possible to provide
empirical evidence to prove such hypothesis

regarding not only active commuting to school,
but also other related phenomena. The on-going
studies of the research team will be continued by
a number of topics including the dependent
commuting to school, differences between what
parents and children perceive about safety and
security of the environment, the associations of
the urban form with body mass index, the
importance of the quality of the built
environment in active commuting to school, the
correlations between the parental mobility habits
with the children’s commuting patterns, etc. All
the above will be considered not only within the
countries and cities, but also by comparing the
phenomena in different regions such as the
central/western Europe, southern areas, and
south-eastern areas, as well as comparing
between different city sizes. In addition, such
questions like what the team of this study try to
answer can be followed by colleagues by
collecting data from countries not covered by this
research.