Impact of the Safe Routes
to School Program on
Walking and Bicycling

abstract
Increasing active transportation to school has been a national policy goal
since Congress included the Safe Routes to School (SRTS) program in the
2005 federal transportation bill. Policy attention to this topic reflects the
health benefits associated with regular physical activity, environmental benefits
from decreased driving, and safety benefits from decreasing injuries and fatalities 
related to school travel (Davison, Werder, & Lawson, 2008; DiMaggio &
Li, 2013; Janssen & LeBlanc, 2010; Woodcock et al., 2009; Younger, Morrow-Almeida,
Vindigni, & Dannenberg, 2008). The role that planners have in
infrastructure investment and the skills planners have in coordinating initiatives 
with developers, schools, and local law enforcement place them at the
center of efforts to encourage walking and bicycling to school.
Between 2005 and 2012, Congress appropriated $1.2 billion for the SRTS
program to provide education, encouragement, and enforcement programs as
well as engineering improvements at almost 14,000 elementary and middle
schools (McDonald, Barth, & Steiner, 2013; National Center for Safe Routes
to School, 2013a). Existing evaluations of the SRTS program find increases in
walking and bicycling to school (Boarnet, Day, Anderson, McMillan, &
Alfonzo, 2005; Mendoza et al., 2011; Stewart, Moudon, & Claybrooke, 2014)
and decreases in injuries near SRTS improvements (DiMaggio & Li, 2013;
Ragland, Pande, Bigham, & Cooper, 2014). However, many of the studies
focus on small geographic areas, such as an individual school or school district,
limiting the generalizability of findings (Buckley, Lowry, Brown, & Barton,
2013; McDonald, Yang, Abbott, & Bullock, 2013; Mendoza et al., 2011).
Larger-scale studies are characterized by research designs that make it difficult

to discern SRTS impacts from secular trends (Staunton,
Hubsmith, & Kallins, 2003).
This study addresses both of these concerns by evaluating 
the SRTS program in the District of Columbia
(DC) and three states—Florida, Oregon, and Texas—
using a strong research design with case and control
schools, which allows identification of the independent
impacts of the SRTS program. Using data from 801
schools, we find a positive impact of the SRTS program
on walking and bicycling. Engineering improvements are
associated with an 18% relative increase in walking and
bicycling. The effects of education and encouragement
programs are cumulative, with each additional year of
program participation associated with an absolute increase 
of 1% in the proportion of students walking and
bicycling to school. Over the course of five years, these
education and encouragement programs could lead to a
25% relative increase in walking and bicycling. These
results provide planners with the evidence required to
make provision of safe walk and bicycle routes to school a
standard part of planning practice using tools such as the
comprehensive plan, subdivision regulations, and capital
budgeting and planning.

Background

SRTS Program Overview
The 2005 federal transportation bill, the Safe,
Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity
Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU), authorized
SRTS as a new program that would provide full federal
funding to enable and encourage children, including
those with disabilities, to walk and bicycle to school; to
make walking and bicycling to school safe and more
appealing; and to facilitate the planning, development,
and implementation of projects that improve safety and
reduce traffic, fuel consumption, and air pollution in the
vicinity of schools (Federal Highway Administration,
2007).
The SRTS program provided grants to assist communities 
across the country in creating safer and more supportive 
environments for children to walk or bicycle to
school. The program contributed to multiple policy objectives, 
including the U.S. Department of Transportation’s
livability goals and the Department of Health and Human
Services’ efforts to increase physical activity and reduce
obesity in children and adolescents. These efforts sought to
reverse sharp declines in walking and bicycling to school
from about 48% in 1969 to less than 13% in 2009
(McDonald, Brown, Marchetti, & Pedroso, 2011).

The program allocated funding to state departments of
transportation (DOTs) based on the number of schoolaged 
children. Each state was required to set aside 10% to
30% of the funds for non-infrastructure-related activities
such as public awareness campaigns and outreach to the
community, traffic education, bicycle and pedestrian safety
programs for children, and training for SRTS volunteers
and managers. The infrastructure investments could include 
the planning, design, and construction of sidewalk
improvements; traffic calming and speed reduction improvements; 
pedestrian and bicycle crossing improvements;
on-street bicycle facilities; off-street bicycle and pedestrian
facilities; secure bicycle parking; and traffic diversion
improvements in the vicinity of schools (within 2 miles)
that would substantially improve the ability of students to
walk and bicycle to school. Each state was also required to
fund a full-time coordinator for the state’s SRTS program.
In 2012, the SRTS program was merged with other non-motorized 
funding programs into the Transportation
Alternatives Program (Federal Highway Administration,
2013a).

SRTS Evaluation Studies

Many studies evaluate aspects of the SRTS program.
Several of those studies are primarily descriptive, aimed at
explaining the program history, trends, or funding
mechanism and expenditures (Cradock, Fields, Barrett, &
Melly, 2012; McDonald, Barth, et al., 2013; National
Center for Safe Routes to School, 2013b). The remainder
focuses on the impacts of SRTS programs on active
transportation and injuries. Most attention has been
given to the program’s impacts on the modes of travel
children use to go to and from school; the results
generally show increased walking and bicycling. The
study designs of these evaluations have been a major
challenge. Studies with strong research designs tend to
have a limited geographic scope and range of SRTS
interventions, and therefore limited generalizability.
For example, Mendoza et al. (2011) test the impacts of
researcher-led walking school bus programs using a
randomized controlled trial in eight low-income Houston
schools, finding these programs led to more walking to
school. However, it is unclear what the impact of the
intervention would be in other areas or with “walking
school buses” organized by volunteers or school staff.
Another set of recent studies investigates a wider
range of environments using comparisons of active travel
before and after SRTS interventions or between areas
with and without SRTS interventions. For example,
Stewart et al. (2014) use data from 53 schools in four
states and find walking and bicycling increased from

12.8% to 19.8% after completion of SRTS projects.
Ragland et al. (2014) study eight California schools, and
find students living near SRTS improvements were more
likely to walk to school than students living equally close
to school but not near a SRTS improvement. The limitation 
of these studies is that, due to the research designs, it
is unclear whether the observed increases in active travel
are due to the SRTS program or alternate explanations
such as preexisting conditions or an exogenous, timedependent
shift such as a change in gas prices or
employment levels.
A small number of studies that include control schools
in their research design also find that SRTS programs have
positive impacts. Buckley et al. (2013) study encouragement 
events at two Moscow (ID) elementary schools and
find sustained increases in walking and bicycling after the
program compared with a nearby school that did not
participate in the program. McDonald, Yang, et al. (2013)
find absolute increases of 5 to 20 percentage points in
walking and bicycling due to the SRTS programs at
Eugene (OR) schools, using data from nine schools with
SRTS projects and five schools without such projects.
While these studies use an improved research design, they
represent a very small number of schools, and are therefore
unlikely to be generalizable to a wider range of
environments.
Two recent, high-quality studies find reductions in
pedestrian injuries and crashes around SRTS interventions.
DiMaggio and Li (2013) find that the rate of pedestrian
injury decreased by 44% for youth aged 5 to 19 years in
New York City census tracts with SRTS treatments, while
rates were unchanged for census tracts without SRTS
projects. Ragland et al. (2014) analyze the impacts of SRTS
infrastructure at 47 schools in California and find significant
decreases in total collisions within 250 feet of SRTS
infrastructure interventions; a decrease in child-involved
collisions is also observed, but the effect is not statistically
significant.

Approach and Methods

Our analysis focuses on DC and three states—Florida,
Oregon, and Texas. These areas were selected because they
include a wide range of environments and the research
team had access to extensive data on their SRTS programs.
As Table 1 shows, Florida and Texas are large states where
active SRTS programs funded interventions at nearly 1,000
schools in each state. Oregon is a mid-sized state with cities
that have received national attention for their SRTS programs, 
such as Portland and Eugene. DC represents a
highly urbanized region with schools serving students from
diverse socioeconomic backgrounds. As Table 1 shows,
available SRTS funding on a per-student basis was much
higher in DC due to the structure of the program, which
set a funding floor irrespective of student population. The
remainder of this section describes the data and analytic
methods used to identify the impacts of the SRTS program
on walking and bicycling to or from school.

Data: School Travel Mode

The outcome of interest in this study is the proportion
of students walking and bicycling for school trips. Information 
on children’s mode to and from school is compiled
from surveys of students and parents obtained from the
National Center for SRTS, the federally funded clearinghouse 
for information related to SRTS. The National
Center developed a freely available survey instrument to
collect information on school travel mode from parents
and students and also provided schools with free data entry
and data storage. Student reports of travel mode were
collected at the classroom level, with students raising their
hands to report how they traveled to and from school on
the survey day. Parent reports were collected through
individual surveys sent from the school to parents. An
evaluation of the National Center surveys finds that they
provide reliable reports of travel mode (McDonald,
Dwelley, Combs, Evenson, & Winters, 2011). While there

is no federal requirement that schools collect mode data,
many states require applicants and recipients of SRTS
funding to provide travel mode data.
The National Center’s travel mode database covers the
period from the program’s start through the current period.
We selected the years 2007–2012 for our study because
there were few travel mode reports in the program’s early
years (2005–2006), and our study began in 2013. We
supplemented the National Center data with mode data
from previous research studies on school travel to increase
the sample of schools included in this analysis; the supplemental 
surveys used phrasing consistent with the National
Center surveys (see the Technical Appendix for further
details). Our analysis focuses on public and public charter
schools because states awarded few grants to private
schools, and information on school characteristics was not
available for all private schools (McDonald, Barth, et al.,
2013).
School travel mode and information on SRTS
programming was available for an initial sample of 810
schools in DC, Florida, Oregon, and Texas. Data cleaning,

described in the Technical Appendix, reduced the sample
to 801 schools. As Table 2 shows, the final sample reflects
travel mode reports from approximately 65,000 students
and 16,000 parents annually. As Table 3 indicates, of the
801 schools in the final sample, 378 (47%) schools had an
SRTS program between 2007 and 2012, and 423 (53%)
schools had no program during the study period. For many
schools in the sample, travel mode was surveyed at multiple 
time points. For example, 110 (14%) schools reported
mode data four or more times, 85 (10%) schools reported
data at three time points, 193 (24%) schools reported at
two time points, and 413 (52%) schools provided data for
one time point.
For each school and survey date, we calculate the
proportion of students that walked or bicycled to and
from the school in the morning and afternoon. The
Technical Appendix describes the process of calculation
for the student and parent data. Mode surveys at the
801 study schools generated 4,090 observations of the
proportion of students walking and bicycling to or
from school. The number of observations was larger

than the number of schools because each survey generated 
at least two observations of school travel mode,                            
such as morning and afternoon, because some schools                                   
surveyed students and parents on the same survey date,                           
and because nearly half of schools were surveyed multiple times. 
Despite the inclusion of multiple observations 
from the same school and survey date, we are not                           
“double counting” because we used appropriate statistical 
methods to adjust for the presence of multiple                               
observations from the same school and survey date. We                           
also conducted several additional analyses that validated                        
our strategy (described in detail in the Technical                               
Appendix).                                                                       
										
Data: SRTS Interventions                                                         
For all schools with available travel mode data, we                       
attempted to identify the type and timing of SRTS                                
interventions. State SRTS coordinators provided lists of                         
schools with SRTS funding and, in some states,                                   
detailed information about the nature of the projects.                           
In cases where the state DOT lacked information on                               
when SRTS interventions were implemented or the                                  
nature of the interventions, members of the research                             
team interviewed local SRTS program managers, school                            
and municipal staff, and state and local health departments. 
In some cases, staff turnover made it impossible                          
to obtain this information; in these cases, schools were                         
dropped from the analysis. For schools that did not                              
receive any SRTS interventions (i.e., control schools),                          
we also used state DOT records and interviews with                               
school officials, state health departments, and other                            
providers of SRTS programs to help identify those that                           

had applied for SRTS funding but had been unsuccessful 
in their application.
We categorize reported SRTS activities based upon
the “4 E’s”: engineering, enforcement, education, and
encouragement. As Table 4 indicates, education and
encouragement programs are the most common non-infrastructure 
programs in our sample. Education
programs include classroom safety instruction as well as
skills workshops outside of the classroom where students
practice crossing the street by foot and bicycle. Encouragement 
efforts focus on creating excitement around
walking or bicycling by offering small rewards such as
pencils and stickers, or using organized efforts, such as
walking school buses, to encourage children to walk.
We find that education and encouragement initiatives
were undertaken at the same time; thus, we combine
these categories in our analysis. Enforcement efforts
ranged from collaborations with local police departments
to assign officers to monitor and enforce school zone
speed regulations to more passive initiatives such as
placing portable speed signs in the school zone to
provide drivers with real-time speed information.
Almost all schools with enforcement interventions also
had education and encouragement programs.
Engineering improvements were designed to improve
the safety of walking and bicycling through the provision
or improvement of sidewalks, crosswalks, paths, and
bicycle lanes. Engineering projects also funded bicycle
parking at schools, signage, and traffic calming near the
school. In this sample, many schools reported sidewalk and
crosswalk improvements but relatively few investments in
bicycle lanes or off-street paths.

Data: Contextual School, Neighborhood, and
Survey Information

Previous research has shown that walking and bicycling
to school varies based on demographic and spatial characteristics 
(Davison, Werder, & Lawson, 2008; McDonald,
Brown, et al., 2011). To control for this systematic variation, 
we incorporated information about school characteristics 
from the National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES) and information about neighborhood characteristics 
from the American Community Survey (ACS). The
NCES database contains annual information on enrollment, 
racial and ethnic composition, free and reducedprice
lunch program eligibility, and school location for
American public schools.1 We obtained neighborhood
socio-demographic information from the 2007–2011 ACS
using the block group where the school was located.2 Most
neighborhood-level sociodemographic variables (e.g., racial
and ethnic composition of residents) were not significant
in preliminary models and are not included in the final
models due to the lack of significance and the presence of
school-level measures of racial and ethnic composition. We
retain median household income in the final model despite
a lack of statistical significance because previous research
has highlighted meaningful economic differences in walking 
and bicycling to school and we wanted to control for

neighborhood-level income variation in addition to schoollevel 
variation (McDonald, 2008).
The school’s location is also used to assess the local
built environment through street network and destination
proximity metrics. Final models include Walk Score as a
primary environmental metric, a commercially available
index (0–100) that correlates with access to walkable destinations 
and residential population density (Carr, Dunsiger
& Marcus, 2011; Duncan, Aldstadt, Whalen, Melly, &
Gortmaker, 2011).3 We tested metrics of street connectivity,
such as intersection density and average block length, in the
models, but they were not statistically significant.

Sample Summary

Schools with SRTS programs differ on some but not
all characteristics. For example, as Table 5 shows, schools
with SRTS programs had a lower percentage of Hispanic
students and a higher proportion of African-American
students than schools without a SRTS program. Schools
with SRTS programs had a smaller number of enrolled
students. Economic characteristics were similar across the
two groups; there are no significant differences in the
proportion of students receiving free or reduced-price
lunch or the block group median household income.
Schools receiving SRTS interventions were located in

neighborhoods with a higher population density and better
access to destinations as measured by Walk Score.
Active travel was more common at schools that
received an SRTS intervention during the study period
than at control schools. Rates of walking and bicycling to
school averaged 18% to school and 22% from school, but
with considerable variation across schools. For example, the
bottom quarter of schools had active travel rates of less
than 8%, while the top quarter of schools had rates higher
than 26% in the morning. These reports are higher than
recent national estimates of walking and bicycling (13%)
(McDonald, Brown, et al., 2011).

Analysis

By using schools with and without SRTS programs in
a wide range of contexts, we are able to identify the
impacts of SRTS programs and ensure these impacts are
not confounded with secular trends or demographics. We
model the proportion of students that walked or bicycled
to school as a function of two factors: SRTS interventions
and contextual variables related to school, neighborhood,
and survey characteristics. The focus of our interest is the
SRTS interventions in place at the school at the time of
the survey. For each observation of school travel mode,
we use our database of SRTS interventions to determine if
the SRTS program was in place at the school and, if so,
the number of years the program had been in place. This
structure allows researchers to test how the presence and
length of participation in the SRTS program affected
walking and bicycling.
We developed two models to test the impacts of the
SRTS program. The first focuses on the presence or
absence of any SRTS program elements without regard to
the exact nature of the efforts. This model provides the
broadest test of whether the SRTS program has affected
children’s travel behavior. The second model assesses the
impacts of different categories of SRTS interventions, such
as education and encouragement, engineering, and
enforcement, and is included to provide practitioners with
a better understanding of the impacts of each type of
SRTS intervention. We did not develop models to analyze
the impacts of specific SRTS projects, such as crosswalk
improvements, because we believe the choice of specific
intervention is controlled by idiosyncratic local conditions
that are difficult to model.
Models include contextual variables related to school,
neighborhood, and survey characteristics to control for
systematic variation in rates of walking and bicycling to
school unrelated to the SRTS interventions. For example,
the prevalence of walking and bicycling is higher in denser
areas. We systematically controlled for the time of day

because previous research shows that walking is higher in
the afternoon. We also controlled for who reported the
travel mode because we know that parents tend to report
higher walking and bicycling rates than do students
themselves (McDonald, Brown, et al., 2011).
We use a fractional logit model, as described in the
Technical Appendix, because it best fits our needs and the
data. To account for dependence across observations from
the same school, we use robust standard errors that adjust
for potential correlation across schools in the final models.
We also conducted several tests (described in the Technical
Appendix) to ensure that potential correlation across
observations from the same school and survey date did not
unduly influence the final results. All these additional tests
confirm the model results presented in this study.
We calculate the impacts of the SRTS program on
school travel mode by estimating the marginal effect of the
presence and number of years of SRTS interventions on
walking and bicycling. The reported marginal effects
represent how the proportion of students walking and
bicycling to school would change if the SRTS program
were implemented or if it were in place for one additional
year. Further details on the calculation of marginal effects
are available in the Technical Appendix.

SRTS and Children’s Travel to School

As Figure 1 shows, rates of walking and bicycling to
school increased with each year of participation in the
SRTS program. At schools with SRTS programs, 18% of
students walked or bicycled prior to the start of the program. 
Schools with one year of SRTS program participation
had average rates of walking and bicycling of 20%.
Schools with four or more years of SRTS participation had
active travel rates greater than 30%. These simple averages
showed an absolute increase of 13 percentage points, or a
relative change of 71%, in the proportion of students
walking and bicycling after five years of participating in the
SRTS program. These results suggest that SRTS programs
may strongly affect walking and bicycling. Moreover, there
may be a “dose-response” relationship where each additional 
year (or “dose”) of SRTS participation leads to more
walking and bicycling.
However, the simple averages are not a definitive
evaluation of the SRTS program because of the possibility
of selection bias. Schools with long-lived and successful
SRTS program may simply be located in environments
where walking is more likely or may have been surveyed in
a year when exogenous factors increased walking, such as
increases in gas prices. To address these issues, as described

above, we use multivariate regression models that introduce
statistical controls for school and neighborhood characteristics, 
as well as time period, to assess active travel at
schools with and without SRTS programs.
After controlling for these other factors, we continue
to find that the SRTS program increased walking and
bicycling to school. Specifically, walking and bicycling rose
by 1.1 percentage points (p = .002) with each year of
participation in the SRTS program. These findings suggest
a linear “dose-response” relationship: Each additional year
of SRTS participation led, on average, to more walking and
bicycling. For example, if active travel rates were 18% prior
to the start of an SRTS program, our model predicts that
23.5% of students, on average, would walk and bicycle
after five years of program participation. This represents an
absolute increase of 5.5 percentage points and a relative
increase of 31% after five years of SRTS participation.
After one year of SRTS participation, the expected absolute
increase would be 1.1 percentage points or a relative
change of 6%. For reference, the Technical Appendix
contains the full model results.
In our second model, we compare the differential
impacts of engineering, education and encouragement, and
enforcement programs (the full model is available in the
Technical Appendix). The presence of an engineering
improvement was associated with a 3.3 percentage point
increase in walking and bicycling (p = .031); this impact
did not depend on how long the improvement had been in
place. For comparison, this would mean that schools with
18% of students walking and bicycling might expect to see

rates rise to 21.3%, on average, after completing an engineering 
project. This represents a relative increase of 18%.
Education and encouragement interventions also had
significant positive impacts on walking and bicycling, with
each year of participation in an education and encouragement 
program associated with a 0.9 percentage point
increase in walking and bicycling (p = .025). In other
words, schools that started with 18% of students walking
and bicycling would be expected to increase the rate of
active transportation by 0.9 percentage point per year to
22.5% after five years on average, an absolute change of
4.5 percentage points and a relative change of 25%.
Enforcement initiatives did not have a significant association 
with walking and bicycling, though in our sample
many schools implemented education, encouragement,
and enforcement at the same time.
Other variables beyond simply adopting an SRTS
program also influence rates of walking and bicycling to
school in ways consistent with previous research. For
example, walking and bicycling were higher in areas with
greater population density. Walk Score, a proxy for access to
commercial and recreation amenities, had no significant
association, perhaps because the indicator only reflects access
and not the quality of the walking environment (Talen &
Koschinsky, 2013). Other factors also matter. Rates of
walking and bicycling were 3 percentage points higher in the
afternoon, results consistent with other studies (National
Center for Safe Routes to School, 2013b; Zhu & Lee,
2009). Reported walking and bicycling rates were also higher
when reported by parents than by students because parents

reported the students’ usual travel mode as opposed to their
actual travel mode (McDonald, Dwelley, et al., 2011).
School characteristics generally did not significantly
affect walking and bicycling to or from school. However, a
10 percentage point increase in the proportion of students
receiving free or reduced-price lunch was associated with a
0.5 percentage point increase in walking and bicycling. We
did include a dummy variable indicating whether the
school ever received a SRTS treatment to account for any
remaining differences between schools that participated in
the SRTS program and those that did not. The dummy
variable was not significant in either model, suggesting that
observed characteristics do an adequate job of adjusting for
differences between treatment and control schools.

Impacts of the SRTS Program

Our analysis shows that SRTS interventions are associated 
with increased walking and bicycling in DC, Florida,
Oregon, and Texas. We find that engineering improvements 
are associated with an absolute increase of 3 percentage 
points in active travel, which represents a relative
increase of 18%. Education and encouragement programs
exhibit a dose-response relationship with walking and
bicycling, where each additional year of program participation 
is associated with a 1 percentage point increase in
walking and bicycling. Over a five-year period, these education 
and encouragement programs would be expected to
lead to a relative increase in active travel of 25%. These
results hold when comparing funded schools only with
those that applied for the SRTS program and after controlling 
for other factors that influence walking to school such
as population density. These findings accord with the
results of previous studies, which also find positive impacts
of the SRTS program (Boarnet, Anderson, Day, McMillan,
& Alfonzo, 2005; McDonald, Yang, et al., 2013; Mendoza
et al., 2011; Staunton et al., 2003; Stewart et al., 2014).
However, our study represents a substantial extension of
the literature because it uses a stronger research design with
a large study area, thereby increasing confidence in the
generalizability of the results.
While this analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of
the SRTS program in meeting the goal of increasing
walking and bicycling to school, recent changes in federal
transportation policy may result in less federal funds being
available for such investments. The SRTS program was
created in the 2005 federal transportation bill, and
approximately $1.2 billion was appropriated for the program 
(McDonald, Barth, et al., 2013). However, the 2012
transportation bill, Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st

Century (MAP-21), dismantled the standalone SRTS
program and instead made SRTS projects eligible to compete 
for funding with other non-motorized improvements.
In addition, MAP-21 decreased the total funding available
for non-motorized programs and allowed states increased
flexibility to move non-motorized funds to other programs.
It is not yet clear how these changes will affect state funding 
for the SRTS program, but it is possible that some
states will decrease funding for SRTS or non-motorized
programs more generally.
What do these results mean for planning practitioners?
This study provides strong evidence that children will walk
and bicycle to school if communities invest in supportive
infrastructure and programs. Given the uncertainty and
limitations of federal funding for non-motorized modes,
communities should develop strategies to mainstream
SRTS programs through tools available to local planners.
First, planners can articulate support for providing access
by foot and bicycle to schools through the comprehensive
plan and any linked small-area or neighborhood plans. The
goal would be to create an environment where planning for
non-motorized school access is a normal part of neighborhood 
and transportation planning. Second, planners can
amend subdivision regulations to require or encourage the
provision of pedestrian and bicycle access to schools for
new construction or redevelopment. Third, planners can
consider access to school in the capital improvements
planning process. For example, a multiyear sidewalk completion 
program could prioritize investments that are near
a school or route to school. Fourth, local planners can
work more closely with school facility planners to encourage 
construction of schools that can be reached by foot or
bicycle and to identify routes to school (McDonald, 2010).
The development of an ongoing, collaborative relationship
between school and local planners could ensure that
students effectively use infrastructure investments made by
local communities. Finally, planners could pursue federal
and state funding for non-motorized infrastructure for
projects that will improve school travel. Such projects
could be designed to benefit many users, such as a multiuse
path that connects a school to several neighborhoods and
other community amenities.
This analysis has several limitations. First, we were
unable to use panel data methods to address concerns
about self-selection bias or other potential confounding
factors due to our use of fractional logit models and our
unbalanced data set. However, we address self-selection
bias by including contextual variables and estimating
models on portions of our data set and find results are
consistent with overall models. Second, the format of our
data set includes multiple observations of each school at

each survey date (e.g., walking in the morning and the
afternoon). We address concerns about the impacts of
dependence across these observations by using robust
standard errors and estimating additional models on a
subset of data with only one observation per time point.
Again, submodels showed similar results to the overall
models. Third, we evaluate the impact of broad interventions: 
engineering, education and encouragement, and
enforcement. This approach reflects our goal of testing
whether SRTS interventions had positive impacts on
walking and bicycling and recognition that the selection of
particular engineering or education programs depends
heavily on local conditions that may be difficult to model.
We recommend that future research provide more detailed
case studies of how communities selected specific interventions 
and what their impacts were locally. These case
studies would not be generalizable, but would provide
important information to practitioners.

Conclusion

The SRTS program has demonstrated significant
increases in walking and bicycling. Analysis of data from
801 schools in DC, Florida, Oregon, and Texas indicates an
absolute increase of 5.5 percentage points or a relative

change of 31% in the proportion of students walking and
bicycling to school after five years of participating in a SRTS
program. This study supports the efficacy of SRTS programs
as a mechanism for increasing active travel in elementary and
middle schools. The findings represent a beneficial extension
of the existing literature using a strong research design and a
large study area, which has not been done before, and
thereby increasing confidence in the transferability of results.
These results provide planners with strong evidence to
support strategies that make the provision of safe walk and
bicycle routes to school a normal part of the planning
process. Planners have many tools to accomplish this goal,
including comprehensive plans, subdivision regulations, and
capital improvement planning and budgeting.