Is there a gender gap in school travel? An examination of US children
and adolescents

abstract
Previous research on school travel showed an inconsistent relationship between sex and the prevalence
of walking or biking to school. Some studies found that males were more likely to use active transport
modes, but other research found no association between sex and school travel. This study used data from
the 1977, 1983, 1990, 1995, 2001, and 2009 US National Household Travel Surveys to examine sex differences 
in school travel and how they have changed over time. The analysis showed that males walked to
and from school more than females, though differences were modest – between 1% and 2% points – and
were statistically signi<U+FB01>cant only in 1990. In contrast, males biked to school two to three times more than
females. These modal differences may result from females’ observed lower levels of independent mobility. 
Policy interventions, such as the Safe Routes to School program, can address gender differences by
providing programs such as the Walking School Bus that provide adult supervision on the school trip.
Bicycle interventions should ensure that females are participating in the programs.

1. Introduction                                                                             
											
The proportion of US elementary and middle school students                              
usually walking and biking to school declined from 48% in 1969                              
to 13% in 2009 (Beschen, 1972; McDonald et al., 2011). Similar                              
trends have been observed in much of the English-speaking world                             
(Buliung et al., 2009; Pooley et al., 2005; Van Der Ploeg et al., 2008).                    
At the same time, youth obesity rates have increased (Ogden et al.,                         
2006). While causal linkages between the two trends have not                                   
been established (Faulkner et al., 2009), policymakers have allocated 
resources to increase active transportation to and from                               
school. For example, the US federal transportation bill, SAFETEALU, 
and its extensions have appropriated over $860 million for a                            
national Safe Routes to Schools program and the White House Task                            
Force on Childhood Obesity set of goal of increasing the proportion                         
of students walking or biking to school by <U+FB01>fty percent (National                           
Center for Safe Routes to School, 2010; White House Task Force                              
on Childhood Obesity, 2010).                                                                   
One open question – which has not been addressed by current                             
policy initiatives – is whether school travel is gendered. Studies of                       
adult work travel show strong differences in commuting patterns                            
between men and women (Crane, 2007). These differences have                                 
persisted despite declining gaps in employment, licensure, and                              
earnings between the sexes. Research on the gender gap in school                            
travel is more mixed. Some studies report signi<U+FB01>cant differences in
rates of walking to school between males and females, while others
												
show no gender effect. Theoretical perspectives on gender and the
mobility of children and teens are also in <U+FB02>ux. Traditionally,
researchers have believed that girls had less travel independence
than boys because parents were more protective of girls and girls
had more household responsibilities (Hart, 1979; Matthews,
1992). However, Valentine (1997) has suggested that these norms
may be changing as parents become increasingly concerned about
the safety of both sexes in public spaces.
This study looked at gender differences in one particularly
important trip – the trip to and from school – using data from
the US Department of Transportation’s National Household Travel
Surveys (NPTS) conducted between 1977 and 2009. The emphasis
was on walking and biking to school because it is the focus of
current policy interventions. The study analyzed sex differences
in school travel and developed a multinomial logit model to more
robustly test whether there was a gender gap on the school trip
even after controlling for individual and household covariates.
The following section provides background on children and
teen’s school travel and previous research on gender differences.
Next, the paper describes rates of walking and biking to school
by sex at national and regional levels and levels of independent
mobility. The <U+FB01>nal section describes a multinomial logit model to
more carefully test for gender differences among elementary and
middle school students living within two miles of school.

2. Previous research

The literature on school travel, particularly walking and biking
to school, provides insights into how gender affects school trips.
                                             						                                           					
Most studies <U+FB01>nd that males walk and bike to school more than
females. However, differences are often not statistically signi<U+FB01>cant.
McMillan et al. (2006) is one of the few studies to focus on gender 
differences in school travel. The study found that third to <U+FB01>fth
grade Californian boys were signi<U+FB01>cantly more likely than girls to
walk and bike to school (27% vs. 19%). This study also found that
the amount of time the caregiver walks moderated the effect of
gender on active transportation to school. When caregivers spent
more time walking, there were fewer sex differences in children’s
behavior. Several other California studies have found signi<U+FB01>cant
gender differences. For example, Rosenberg et al. (2006) showed
that fourth and <U+FB01>fth grade boys from southern California were
more likely to walk, bike, or skateboard to school at least 2–3 days
per week than girls. In a study of California teenagers, Babey et al.
(2009) found that the odds of walking or biking to school for girls
were two-thirds that of boys.
International studies have also found signi<U+FB01>cant differences.
Timperio et al. (2006), in their study of 235 5–6 year olds and
677 10–12 year olds in Melbourne, Australia, found boys aged
10–12 biked at signi<U+FB01>cantly higher rates than girls (9.2% vs.
3.7%), but there were no differences in walk rates. The study found
no gender differences in walk and bike rates among younger children. 
A larger Australian study (n = 2961) of 10 and 14 year olds
found signi<U+FB01>cant differences in school travel by sex. They found
girls were more likely to walk to school (44.3% vs. 37.4%), but were
less likely to bike (8.3% vs. 22.4%) leading to lower overall rates of
active travel among females (Leslie et al., 2010). In a London, Ontario 
study of similarly aged children (11–13 years old), Larsen
et al. (2009) found that boys were 1.5 times more likely to walk
or bike for school travel. Nelson et al. (2008) found that high school
boys in Ireland were signi<U+FB01>cantly more likely to walk to school
than girls. Yelavich et al. (2008) found similarly results among elementary 
school children in New Zealand. In the UK, Panter et al.

(2010) report that boys are more likely to use non-motorized
modes than girls, but among non-motorized mode users, girls were
signi<U+FB01>cantly more likely than boys to walk (boys were more likely
to use bicycles).

There are several examples of studies that found no association
between gender and school travel. Martin et al. (2007) reported no
signi<U+FB01>cant difference in rates of active transportation to school
among a nationally representative sample of 2649 US children
aged 9–15 living within 1 mile of their school. A study of 315 Georgia 
children aged 5–15 living within 1 mile of school found that
boys walked to school more frequently than girls (19.3–17.9) but
the difference was not statistically signi<U+FB01>cant (Bricker et al.,
2002). Kerr et al. (2006) reported no gender differences in walking
and biking to school for children aged 5–18 living in Seattle. Booth
et al. (2007) examined mode choice to school among sixth graders
in New South Wales, Australia, and found no signi<U+FB01>cant difference
in the likelihood of walking (vs. riding in a car or using public
transport) by gender. Similarly, Page et al. (2010) and Black et al.
(2001) found no differences in mode choice to school by gender
for children in the UK and Grize et al. (2010) found no differences
in school mode choice for Swiss boys and girls.

2.1. Age

This review suggests that gender effects may be most important
for third through eighth grade (ages 8–13) students. In fact some of
the variation in results may come from the different age groups
studied. Existing research on children’s mobility shows that age
is a critical determinant of children’s travel and play (Matthews,
1992). In a study of a New England town, Hart (1979) found that
children, particularly boys, gained much more travel independence
around age 10. A study in the UK found the same increase in independence 
occurred around 8 or 9 (Matthews, 1992). This suggests

that studies which do not disaggregate by age may not detect sex
differences. In other words, children under 8 may not exhibit sex
differences because most are not allowed to travel independently.
Data from the UK also suggest that sex differences disappear for
high school age children (Hillman et al., 1990).
The documented differences in boys’ and girls’ travel freedom
may relate to gendered parenting practices. In-depth qualitative
studies of children’s mobility have found that parental concern
for the safety of females combined with higher levels of household
responsibility may cause girls to have smaller home ranges and
make fewer trips without adults (Hart, 1979; O’Brien et al., 2000;
Valentine, 1997). However Valentine (1997) found that middle
class parents were reluctant to assign older children responsibility
for younger siblings and have strong safety concerns for boys as
well as girls.

2.2. Location in region

O’Brien et al. (2000) found that children’s freedom of movement
was higher for both boys and girls in a lower-density New Town as
compared to London. They concluded that the ‘‘sheer vastness and
social heterogeneity of global cities, such as London, may make
them unknowable to children and adults alike’’. Earlier research
had shown the opposite with sex differences being minimized in
an urban setting and maximized in suburban and rural environments 
(Hart, 1979; van Vliet, 1983) Given the vastly different settings 
these studies used (and differing de<U+FB01>nitions of low density),
this research may suggest that the effect of density is non-linear
and that children have the greatest freedom in places that are
small enough for parents to know their neighbors but large enough
for children to have walkable destinations.

2.3. Sample size

The inconsistent relationship between school travel mode and
gender is also a product of varying research designs. The ability
to detect statistically signi<U+FB01>cant differences, i.e. power, depends
on the size of the differences and sample size. With a small sample,
differences must be very large to be judged statistically signi<U+FB01>cant.
With a very large sample, even quite small differences can often be
statistically signi<U+FB01>cant. Of the studies that report a signi<U+FB01>cant gender 
effect, the difference in walk rates between males and females
ranges from 4% to 8% points. Detecting a difference of this size
requires a sample of at least 1000–3000 to have adequate power,
e.g. 0.8. Many of the studies discussed above had smaller sample
sizes.

3. Data

The NPTS is a population-based survey conducted by the US
Department of Transportation (DOT) in 1969, 1977, 1983, 1990,
1995, 2001, and 2009. The survey collects information on all trips
undertaken by members of selected households on a randomly-assigned 
survey day. Household members are asked to provide information 
on all trips including purpose, mode, and travel time. Data
are collected on the demographic characteristics, e.g. age and sex,
of all household members. Race and ethnicity are collected for
the adult respondent, generally a parent or guardian. Individual
data are available for the 1977–2009 surveys.
The unit of analysis is the unlinked trip to and from school. Trips
to school had a trip purpose of Civic/Educational/Religious (1977),
School/Church (1983, 1990), School (1995), Go to school as student
(2001, 2009); occurred on weekdays between 5am and 11am from
September to May; the respondent was between the ages of 5 and
18; and the respondent began the travel day at home. Trips from

school had a similar de<U+FB01>nition with the exception that the trip had
to begin between 1 pm and 6 pm. In the limited number of cases
where a respondent had more than one trip qualifying as a to or
from school trip, the earlier trip was counted as the school trip.
To be included in the analysis, respondents had to report travel
mode and sex. Based on this de<U+FB01>nition, 3297 surveyed individuals
made trips to school in 1977, 1295 in 1983, 4048 in 1990, 8398 in
1995, 12,426 in 2001, and 19,363 in 2009. Sample sizes for trips
home from school were slightly lower in each year with 3120 observed 
trips home in 1977, 1199 in 1983, 4105 in 1990, 7812 in
1995, 11,681 in 2001 and 18,100 in 2009. These varying sample
sizes mean that for similar effect sizes power is lowest in 1983.
Although the NPTS is the only source of trend data on school
travel in the United States, there are several important limitations.
All of the information for youth under fourteen and much of the
data for <U+FB01>fteen and 16 year olds is proxy-reported by adults in
the household (US Department of Transportation, 2004a). However, 
it is likely that parents are accurate reporters for school trips.
Next, there have been important changes in the administration and
design of the NPTS. First, the 1977 and 1983 surveys utilized in-person 
interviews conducted by <U+FB01>eld staff of the Census Bureau;
subsequent surveys relied on telephone interviews conducted by
private research <U+FB01>rms (Research Triangle Institute and Federal
Highway Administration, 1997; US Department of Transportation,
2004a). Second, prompts were added in the 2001 survey to encourage 
reporting of non-motorized trips (US Department of Transportation, 
2004a). Third, the 1977 and 1983 surveys were based on a
clustered sample design; more recent surveys used a non-clustered
list-assisted Random Digit Dial sample strati<U+FB01>ed by geographic
area (US Department of Transportation, 2004a). Finally, response
rates were signi<U+FB01>cantly lower for the 1995, 2001, and 2009 surveys
due to the introduction of a travel diary system which required a
two-stage data collection process (US Department of Transportation, 
2004a). While it is dif<U+FB01>cult to quantify the effects of these
changes, analyses by DOT have shown that reporting of school
and work trips has been relatively unchanged (US Department of
Transportation, 2004b). Because of that, methodological changes
should not alter the <U+FB01>ndings of this analysis which focuses on comparing 
mode split for a primary trip purpose across years.
Another important consideration with the NHTS is the role of
place. The literature documents variation in school travel behavior
in urban and suburban areas and even suggests the potential for
varying sex effects in different contexts. Analyses looking only at
national averages might miss this important local variation. The
large sample size in the 2009 data allows analysis of regional
and even neighborhood patterns in certain jurisdictions where
additional samples were collected, thereby allowing study of
whether the national patterns are repeated at the local level.

4. Results

The following sections present the <U+FB01>ndings from the NHTS series. 
The <U+FB01>rst section presents national and regional estimates of
school trip mode shares by sex in aggregate and strati<U+FB01>ed by age.
The second section focuses on differences in independent mobility
between boys and girls. The third section develops multinomial
logit models of the trip to school to test whether behavior varies
signi<U+FB01>cantly by sex even when accounting for individual and
household factors. These <U+FB01>ndings are then related to current policy
interventions for school travel.

4.1. School travel

Table 1 shows the modal distribution for trips to and from
school by sex from 1977 to 2009. The data highlight some important 
differences between males and females. Biking rates were two
to three times higher for males than females in nearly every year
(Table 1). However, biking accounted for a small proportion,
approximately one to two percent, of all school travel. The prevalence 
of walking to or from school did not vary signi<U+FB01>cantly between 
girls and boys in most years (Table 1). Differences were
generally one to two percentage points with boys often having
the higher prevalence of walking. One exception was 1990 where
signi<U+FB01>cant differences of approximately four percentage points
were observed in the prevalence of walking between males and females. 
Given the anomalous nature of this <U+FB01>nding, it is dif<U+FB01>cult to
interpret. The data con<U+FB01>rmed the <U+FB01>ndings from other studies that
automobility has increased and walking is more common on the
trip from school vs. the trip to school (Buliung et al., 2009; Hayghe,
1996; McDonald et al., 2011; Schlossberg et al., 2006). But patterns
of difference between males and females were similar in the morning 
and the afternoon even though walking and biking were more
common in the afternoon.

4.1.1. Robustness check: regional analyses

The national results could mask important gender differences at
the local level by ‘‘averaging out’’ gender effects. For example, consider 
two identical cities. In City A, all girls are driven to school and
all boys walk to school; in City B, the reverse is true. An overall
analysis would <U+FB01>nd no gender differences even though substantial
differences exist at the city level. Oversampling of some regions in
the 2009 NHTS allowed detailed analyses of sub-regional differences 
in walk mode share by sex. In <U+FB01>ve metropolitan areas with
large samples of students, there were no statistically signi<U+FB01>cant
differences in the proportion of students walking to school by gender 
in 2009 (Table 2). This was true overall and when disaggregated 
by residential density. For example, in the New York PMSA
(which includes New York City and Westchester, Rockland, and
Putnam counties) 12.9% of boys and 11.1% of girls walked to school
(p = 0.490). A county by county analysis of the PMSA also shows no
signi<U+FB01>cant gender differences. For example in the Bronx, 33.3% of
females walked to school and 34.6% of males walked (p = 0.925).
In Staten Island, 12.5% of females walked and 10.0% of males
walked (p = 0.687). In the highest density areas of the NY PMSA
(de<U+FB01>ned as block groups with densities above 10,000 people per
square mile), 21.9% of boys and 18.4% of girls walked (p = 0.468).
These results suggest it is unlikely that there is substantial averaging 
out of gender differences.

4.2. Independent mobility

Theory suggests females have less travel freedom than males.
Studies have shown boys traveling further from home and being
more likely to travel without an adult (Matthews, 1992). These differences 
might appear not only in how the student traveled to
school, but also in whom they traveled with. The 1990 through
2001 travel surveys showed that males were somewhat more
likely to be traveling by themselves or with friends and siblings
as they walked to schools; females were more likely to walk with
a household adult (Table 3).1 Many of the differences are not statistically 
signi<U+FB01>cant but the pattern is consistent particularly for elementary 
school students.
The 2009 survey asked parents whose children lived within 2
miles of their school when they would allow their child to walk
or bike to school without an adult. Approximately 6% of parents
planned to give their <U+FB01>rst-graders permission to walk independently 
(Fig. 1). By 12th grade, nearly 90% of parents planned to give


The in-depth qualitative studies undertaken by geographers offer 
a basis for explaining these observations. Research done in the
1970s in the US and UK found that parents were quite concerned
about sexual molestation of girls and therefore limited their time
in the public realm (Matthews, 1992). At the same time, boys were
given substantial independence around age 10 in accordance with
the idea that ‘‘boys will be boys’’ and are less vulnerable to stranger
danger than girls (Hart, 1979). While less discussed in the literature, 
this could also explain why a signi<U+FB01>cant proportion of parents
expect to restrict travel freedom for high school girls. There is no
evidence that parents’ intention to limit the travel freedom of high
school girls comes to fruition as there are few gender differences in
the travel pattern of high school male and females.

4.3. Multivariate analysis

The simple proportions revealed strong sex differences in biking
to school and modest to non-existent differences in other modes.
However, the descriptive analyses highlighted the strong in<U+FB02>uence
of demographic factors such as age on mode choice. Multinomial
logit models were developed to better control for this and other
demographic factors. The models focused on trips of less than
2 miles – a common cut point where many school districts provide
school bus service – for students aged 5–14 (McDonald and Howlett, 2007). 
The travel decisions of older students are complicated
by the transition to driving and therefore best explored separately.
Rural areas were also excluded from the analysis because of the
different conditions in those areas. By simultaneously controlling
for multiple individual and household factors, the logit models provided 
the most ef<U+FB01>cient test of whether there are gender differences 
in school travel.
For 1977–1995, multinomial logit models analyzed three modal
options: being driven to school, walking, or taking transit/school
buses. Biking was excluded from these models because the samples 
were too small to allow a robust set of covariates. For 2001
and 2009, biking was included as a fourth travel option. The models 
controlled for distance to school, age, race, vehicle ownership,
single parent status, and location in region. From 1977 to 1990, trip
distance was available as a two categories variable (<1 mile, 1–1.99
miles); from 1995 to 2009, distance information was continuous
though users tended to report in common increments (e.g. 1/
2 mile, 1 mile). Data from these later years was recoded as a categorical 
variable (<0.5 miles, 0.5 miles, 0.51–0.99 miles, 1 mile,
1.01–1.99 miles). Density of a household’s block group was available 
for 1990–2009. For 1977 and 1983, only information on

whether the residence was in the census-designated center city
area was available.
The modeling had two goals. The <U+FB01>rst was to test whether males
and females responded differently to the factors that affect walking. 
In other words, were the coef<U+FB01>cient vectors equal for males
and females? This required a Chow-type test. However because logit 
models are conditioned on the variance of unobserved factors, a
standard Chow test would fail to account for these scale differences
(Swait and Louviere, 1993). The Louviere–Swait test is a modi<U+FB01>ed
Chow test accounting for potential differences in variance between
males and females by adding a scale parameter based on sex. To
make the problem identi<U+FB01>able, only the ratio of the male to female
scale parameters was estimated, i.e. the scale parameter for males
is arbitrarily set to 1. The likelihood ratio was then used to test
whether the coef<U+FB01>cient vectors are equal (allowing the alternative
speci<U+FB01>c constants to vary), i.e. bF = bM. This was done by comparing
the log likelihood of the joint model to the sum of the log likelihood 
of the female only and male only models.
  
The second goal was to test whether females were less likely to
walk or bike to school than males even if they had similar
responses to explanatory factors such as age and trip distance. So
even if there were no signi<U+FB01>cant differences in the coef<U+FB01>cients on
explanatory variables between males and females, did the alternative 
speci<U+FB01>c constant differ between males and females? This is
simply a test of whether the coef<U+FB01>cient on the female dummy variable 
is signi<U+FB01>cantly different from zero and is appropriate when
the Louviere–Swait test shows no differences in coef<U+FB01>cient vectors.
Borrowing the previous notation, this was a test that b1 = 0 with bF
constrained to equal bM.
The Louviere–Swait test showed no evidence that the coef<U+FB01>cients 
on explanatory variables differed between males and females, 
i.e. there was no reason to reject the null hypothesis of
equality between bF and bM (Table 4). This means that variables
like trip distance and density do not have differential effects on
the utility of each travel mode for males vs. females. In addition,
there was no evidence that the variance of unobserved factors,
i.e. the scale factor k, varied between males and females. Therefore
<U+FB01>nal models did not include a scale factor. Full model results are
available from the author upon request.
While there was no evidence of differing responses to the variables 
of interest, models estimated jointly for males and females
suggested that females were less likely to walk or bike to school
for short trips. Speci<U+FB01>cally the coef<U+FB01>cient on the female dummy
variable in the walk and bike utilities was always negative with
one exception (walk utility in 2001). For biking, the multivariate
models reinforced the descriptive <U+FB01>ndings. Females are signi<U+FB01>cantly 
less likely to bike to school than males. The story is more
complex for walking. Females are generally less likely to walk to

school for short trips, but the effect was only signi<U+FB01>cant in 1990
and 1995. In 2009, the coef<U+FB01>cient was at the edge of statistical signi<U+FB01>cance 
(p = 0.08).
To better understand sex differences, it is helpful to translate
the model coef<U+FB01>cients into estimates of how sex affects the probability 
of walking or biking to school. This discrete effect was
estimated as the average over the sample of each individual’s predicted 
probability of walking if the respondent were female less
the predicted probability if the individual were male (Train,
2003). The results showed that the effects of sex on walking to
school have decreased over time, but being female was always
associated with a decrease in walking (Table 4). In 1977, being female 
was associated with a 4.9% point decrease in the probability
of walking all else being equal. In 2009, being female was associated 
with a 1.5 percentage point decrease.
5. Implications for planners and researchers
The models and simple averages provide evidence that females
are somewhat less likely to walk to school than males, with the differences 
narrowing in recent decades. However, the lack of strong
differences in walking to school does not imply that females have
begun walking as much as males, but rather that both groups have
become equally unlikely to walk.
In contrast to walking, strong sex differences exist in biking to
school in the US. This is a particular concern because studies of
adult biking suggest women in the US are less likely to bike than
men (Garrard et al., 2008). While no studies have looked at the lifecycle 
effects of bicycling, it is certainly intriguing that gender differences 
in cycling emerge at such a young age in the US. This
stands in contrast to countries where biking is more common. A
study of 9-year olds in Denmark found equal rates of biking
(38%) to school among boys and girls (Cooper et al., 2006) and in
Jiangsu Province, China approximately two-thirds of 12–14 year
old boys and girls cycled to school (Shi et al., 2006).
For advocates and policymakers interested in increasing walking 
and biking to school, these <U+FB01>ndings suggest the need for attention 
to gendered travel behavior. But the <U+FB01>ndings do not fully
explain the mechanisms causing differences between males and females. 
The data suggest that parental limits on mobility may be
stronger for females than males as evidenced by differences in
when children were allowed to travel without an adult. This argues
for creating interventions that affect parental behavior. However,
this approach privileges parental perspectives without recognizing
children’s agency (Thomsen, 2004). Could gender differences
emerge from different travel preferences between boys and girls?
Or do gender differences emerge from complex interactions between 
parents and children? Even if parents place equal restrictions 
on males and females and both sexes have similar
preferences for walking and biking, differences could emerge if
males are more likely to negotiate with parents about the rules


governing travel. Further research is needed to sort out these
mechanisms and provide a more rigorous explanation for observed
differences.
Nevertheless, existing programs can address some of the causes
of gender differences. If parental concerns limit walking and biking
for females, then organized parental escorts might overcome those
fears. These efforts could mimic the existing ‘‘walking school bus’’
programs where a designated parental escort walks a group of children 
to school at a set time and route (Collins and Kearns, 2005). If
youth travel preferences are key factors in gender differences, then
school or community-based encouragement programs might
change behavior. For example, the Boltage program offers individualized 
encouragement to bike to school. Schools adopting this
program could focus on ensuring that substantial numbers of females 
enroll in the program.

6. Conclusion
This study found that males were somewhat more likely to walk
to and from school than females but the differences were generally
not statistically signi<U+FB01>cant. In contrast, males were two to three
times more likely to bike to and from school than females. The observed 
differences in walking and biking to and from school may
result from females’ being less likely to have permission to walk
or bike without an adult than males of the same age. These differences 
in permission to travel independently emerge around 5th
grade and continue through high school. These results suggest that
policymakers and advocates for increasing active transportation to
school should pay attention to gendered travel behavior by developing 
interventions that address parental concerns about students
traveling alone and encourage females to take part in active transport 
programs. Further research is needed to understand how gender 
differences in school travel emerge.