Taking the bus? Barriers and facilitators for adolescent use of public buses to school

abstract
Transport to school can contribute significantly to adolescents’ physical activity but in New Zealand – as in many
other countries around the world – many adolescents are driven to school. Public transport offers an opportunity
to integrate incidental active transport into school commutes. In this paper, we bring together multiple sources
of data into a multi-method study to elucidate the barriers to and facilitators of public transport use by adolescents 
for school travel in Dunedin, New Zealand, a city with low rates of public transport use. The data include
a public bus survey from Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey (OSSLS, 1391 adolescents); the Built
Environment Active Transport to School (BEATS) Study parental survey (350 parents), focus groups (54 ado­
lescents, 25 parents, 12 teachers) and semi-structured interviews (12 principals); interviews with three policymakers 
from local/regional/national agencies; and analysis of 10 relevant local/regional/national strategies/
transport plans. The findings show how distance to school, cost, parental trip chaining, built environment features, 
the weather, convenience, and safety perceptions are major barriers to using public transport to school.
Moreover, current transport planning documents do not favour public health. A number of recommendations
that could increase public transport use are made including: raising parking prices to discourage parents driving
and trip-chaining; improving bus infrastructure and services; providing subsidies; and changing perceptions of
public transport use and users. These actions, however, require collaboration between government authorities
across the local, regional and national scale.

1. Introduction                                                                                     
													
Travel can provide access to employment and education, as well as                              
opportunities for physical activity and social engagement (Mindell                                  
et al., 2011). How people travel affects both their own health and that                             
of others (Cohen et al., 2014). Many factors affect travel mode choice,                             
including perceptions of transport modes (e.g. perceptions of public                                
transport in car-dominated societies (Murray et al., 2010)); political                              
frameworks and environment; funding regimes; and the built and natural 
environment. New Zealand’s transport system is characterised by                                
high private vehicle ownership and use (Hopkins et al., 2015); limited                              
availability and utilisation of public transport; and low rates of active                           
transport (Shaw and Russell, 2016). At the same time, New Zealand had                               
the third highest adult obesity prevalence among OECD countries in                                  
2017, while 36% of 10–14 year olds were overweight or obese in 2016/                                
2017 (Ministry of Health, 2017). Physical activity levels in New                                    

Zealand children and adolescents are inadequate (Smith et al., 2018a,b)
with just under 40% of those aged 8–18 years meeting minimum physical 
activity guidelines (=60 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical
activity (MVPA) every day) (Kek et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2018a).
Given reported reductions in physical activity (Aubert et al., 2018) and
rises in obesity at all ages in most high income countries, the opportunity 
to use active travel (primarily walking and/or cycling) to incorporate 
physical activity into everyday life is particularly important.
The use of public transport is often associated with ‘active travel’,
with opportunities for increased physical activity to and from bus, tram
and train stations (Bartels et al., 2016; Besser and Dannenberg, 2005;
Durand et al., 2016; Jones et al., 2012; Lachapelle and Pinto, 2016;
Rissel et al., 2012). Public transport, which has a range of potential
benefits for the health of the planet and of people, offers the opportunity 
to access educational, health and social sites while still incorporating 
a degree of physical activity and independence.

This is important, because rates of active travel to school have fallen in
New Zealand over the past several decades (Ministry of Transport, 2015),
similar to many high- (Gray et al., 2014) and middle-income countries (de
Sá et al., 2015). In 2010–2014, only 3% of New Zealand adolescents
regularly cycled and 27% walked to school (Ministry of Transport, 2015).
This is mirrored by New Zealand adolescents’ ongoing preference for carbased 
travel (Hopkins et al., 2019) and substantially less independent
mobility for schoolchildren compared with earlier generations (Bhosale
et al., 2017; Ergler, 2020; Porskamp et al., 2019). Barriers to active travel
to school by New Zealand adolescents include home-to-school distance,
time constraints, after-school activities, lack of social support, the convenience 
of being driven to school, the weather, environmental factors
such as lack of cycle parking or cycle paths, lack of interest, and both
adolescents’ and parents’ concerns regarding traffic safety and absence of
school zoning (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017; Ikeda et al., 2018; Kearns et al.,
2012; Mandic et al., 2015a,b, 2017, 2020).
Little is known about the factors which enable and constrain the use
of public buses for school travel, unlike the myriad of studies of walking
or door-to-door school buses (Hinckson, 2016; Howley, 2001; Park and
Kim, 2010; Wilson et al., 2010) or public bus use in general (Barker
et al., 2019; Broome et al., 2010; Moore, 2012; Simons et al., 2013).
Distance is important, as is the bus service and quality including frequency, 
journey time and connections (Wilson et al., 2010; Hinckson,
2016; Broome et al., 2010). Safety associated with crowdedness and
lack of seatbelts contribute to the negative perception of bus use
(Hinckson, 2016). Nonetheless, adolescents reported enjoying the time
to socialise on buses (Hinckson, 2016; Jones et al., 2012; Green et al.,
2014), but bullying and the costs of buses were seen as barriers (Barker
et al., 2019; Broome et al., 2010; Hinckson, 2016). In contrast, free
public bus schemes can be physically and socially enriching experiences
for young people (Goodman et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2012).
The research presented in this paper therefore aimed first to elucidate 
the specific barriers to and facilitators of public transport use by
adolescents for school travel in a city with low rates of public transport
use for this purpose. These data were complemented by analysis of
relevant national, regional and local transport policy documents and
interviews with policy-makers, to help identify potential strategies to
increase public bus use.

2. Methods

2.1. Context

The city of Dunedin (population c.130,000) is located on the east
coast of the South Island of Aotearoa New Zealand. Dunedin is a coastal
city with a territorial land area of 3,314.8 km2 and city-proper of
255 km2. Built on the mouth of a 20 km long natural harbour, Dunedin
has a relatively flat central business district (CBD), and hilly surrounding 
suburbs. Much residential housing is situated on the hills,
requiring navigating often multiple hills and large distances to travel to
school and work. Dunedin’s transport system is therefore highly dependent 
on private car transport. A bus network provides Dunedin’s
public transport system; this was used for only 1% of all trips in
2012–2014 (Early et al., 2015). It has been reported that the bus network 
does not meet the expectations of users due to its low frequency
and route system (Early et al., 2015). Regarding using the bus network
for school travel, fewer than half of Dunedin’s adolescents enrol in the
closest school (Mandic et al., 2018), resulting in an increasing distance
to school, reduced rates of active transport to/from school, and increased 
reliance on motorised transport, mainly by private vehicles
(Mandic et al., 2017; Keall et al., 2020).

2.2. Data sources

This paper reports on multiple data sources (Fig. 1) which engaged
with a variety of stakeholders on the question of public bus use by

secondary school students. The specific research questions and the data
sources used to address these are provided in Table 1. Each of the data
sources and relevant research methods are described briefly below and
summarised in Table 2.

2.2.1. Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey data
The Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey (OSSLS), conducted in
the Otago region of New Zealand in 2009, included adolescents from
ten of twelve Dunedin secondary schools (Mandic et al., 2012). All
participants signed consent prior to participation. For students under
the age of 16 years, parents had the option to sign parental opt-out
forms if they did not want their child to participate. The questionnaire
package included questions on demographics, school travel, lifestyle
habits and sport participation (Mandic et al., 2012) as well as public bus
service (including open-ended comments) and youth space preferences.
The questions relating to demographics, travel to school and public bus
use in Dunedin were analysed using descriptive statistics. Findings
(including comments from open-ended questions about the public bus
service in Dunedin) were summarised and presented as a technical report 
for the Dunedin City Council (DCC) and the Otago Regional
Council (ORC) (Mandic and Skidmore, 2010). Original research data
from that study were analysed for this paper.

2.2.2. Built Environment and Active Transport to School (BEATS) study
All 12 Dunedin secondary schools participated in the BEATS Study,
which was conducted in Dunedin, New Zealand 2013–2017 (Mandic
et al., 2016). The overall study included surveys of secondary school
students and their parents, focus groups with students, parents and
teachers and 12 semi-structured interviews with school principals
(Fig. 1, Table 2) as well as assessment of the built environment characteristics 
of the home and school neighbourhoods. Participants signed
written consent prior to participation. For students under the age of 16,
parents signed either opt-in or opt-out consent, based on the school’s
preference.
Data from the bus to school section of the BEATS Parental Survey
completed by 350 parents (one parent per household) were used to
analyse parents’ perspectives on Dunedin adolescents’ use of public
buses to school (Table 1). BEATS focus groups and interviews were
designed and conducted by DH with another research staff member
present. Discussions covered a wide range of topics including but not
limited to the norms, experiences and perceptions of different transport
modes such as public transport (Mandic et al., 2016; Sandretto et al.,
2020). All sessions were recorded and subsequently transcribed. LC (see
CRediT statement) developed a coding framework and coded all transcripts 
of the interviews with adolescents, parents, teachers and prinpipals, 
with a particular focus on participants’ perspectives on facilitators 
and barriers to bus transport to school. The initial codes were
regularly discussed and checked by CE and then developed into themes
(Braun and Clarke, 2006). The qualitative interviews along with the
open-ended comments in the adolescents’ bus survey provided insights
into the complexities of why using a bus to school seems to be less
appealing than other modes of transport for many people. An overview
of the themes and sub-themes developed is provided in Table 3. Four
main themes were created: 1. transport mode; 2. perceptions, knowledge 
and experience; 3. climate and weather; and 4. school travel responsibilities.

2.2.3. Policy analysis
Three national, three regional and four local/city level policy
documents published between 2003 and September 2017 (Table 4)
were chosen to gain insights into the land transport hierarchy of New
Zealand and how public transport is planned for different levels. These
ten documents were selected based on their relevance to transport to
school both in the national and local context and ranged from legally
binding documents to strategic documents and plans. All documents
were publicly available, downloaded from the official government

websites and then coded thematically and assessed as to whether they:
discussed transport to school; considered public health from a transport
perspective; approached public health from a physical activity point of
view; and/or placed any emphasis on transport diversity. The policy
analysis informed the development of the interview schedule with
policy-makers to gain, for example, a better understanding of existing
and planned integration initiatives and roadblocks for a move towards a
more intgrated, multi-modal transport system (section 2.2.4).


2.2.4. Policy-maker interviews

Interviews were undertaken with three policy-makers working in
Dunedin, to provide further insight on public transport issues raised by
the adolescents, parents, teachers and principals and on policy issues
that emerged as a result of the policy analysis such as planned and
desirable initiative for enticing public transport in light of known usage
barriers. Interviews were conducted with one person from each of the
New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA), ORC, and DCC. These three
agencies - directly and indirectly - shape and implement policy directives 
into the Dunedin transport system and thus can provide institutional 
insights. Individuals were selected based on their knowledge and
involvement in shaping and oversights of Dunedin’s transport system at
the local, regional and national level. Participants were invited by email
and they signed written consent prior to participation. These interviews, 
designed and conducted by LC (see CRediT statement), focused
on barriers and enablers for adolescents using public transport to
school; issues for developing an effective public transport policy to
school; the role of policy for increasing public transport use; and general 
issues of the current transport system. The interviews were digitally
recorded, transcribed, coded and analysed thematically by LC with
input from CE. Three themes were developed from interviews with
policy-makers relating to: barriers and enablers for using public transport; 
issues of the current transport system and for developing an effective 
transport policy; and the role of policy for increasing public
transport use (Table 5).

2.3. A multi-method approach
This paper brings the four methods and datasets described above
into conversation using a multi-method approach. Multi-method approaches 
differ from mixed methods, as they may not be designed with
multiple methods in mind, and thus the ‘mixing’ of the different data

sets is not pre-planned, but rather occurs after all of the data sets have
been independently collected and analysed. This approach overcomes
the inherent weaknesses and limitations from the different methods
independently, and deliberately combines a diversity of methods within
one investigation (Brewer and Hunter, 1989). Yet like some forms of
mixed methods, the different methods are “practiced in parallel…
[weaving] together diverse research techniques to fill gaps, add context,
envision multiple truths, play different sources of data off each other, and
provide a sense of both the general and the particular” (Cope and Elwood,
2009: p5). This relates to a pragmatist philosophical stance which focuses 
on ‘what works’ for a particular topic, question or concern
(Rossman and Wilson, 1985). In the present investigation, our use of
multiple methods allowed us to engage with wider sets of actor groups,
perspectives and understandings around bus use in the case study city,
Dunedin. None of the methods or data sets, and thus no participant
groups, were prioritised, but all were viewed as equally important for
helping us to understand bus use. In doing so we shed light on the
diversity and complexity of needs and experiences and thus provide
richer strategies to increase public bus use than a single method or
dataset is able to do. The data were collected at different times over an
8-year period (2009–2017), therefore they were collected sequentially.
The different methods were brought together to help the authors understand 
the barriers to and facilitators of adolescent use of public buses
for school transport in a comprehensive and detailed way and to formulate 
relevant policy suggestions and strategies.

3. Results

3.1. Survey of adolescents in Dunedin: Findings from the Otago School
Students Lifestyle Survey (2009)
In 2009, 1398 students (54% boys; age: 15.1 ± 1.2 years; 79%
school years 9–10, 21% school years 11–13; 76% New Zealand
European) from ten Dunedin secondary schools completed Young
People’s Bus Survey as part of the Otago School Students Lifestyle

Survey (OSSLS). Overall, 61% of Dunedin secondary school students
Policy documents review
used public buses, with no significant difference between school years.
In the total sample, the most common locations that students travelled
to by bus were school (22%), shops in the town/city centre (29%) and
other shops (16%) and recreational facilities (11%).
Among public bus users, 15% used the bus to get to school on a daily
basis, 22% nearly every day, 15% once or twice per week and 49%
never or hardly ever. Less than 8% of public bus users reported daily or
nearly daily use of public bus to all other locations. Overall, 57% of
students usually travelled on the bus with friend(s), 27% travelled
alone, 7% with a sibling, 4% with a parent or other adult, and 5% with
other(s). Among students who used public bus, 72% liked travelling by
bus. The most frequently reported reasons why students liked travelling
by bus included: getting to a desired location (89%); socialising with
friends on the bus (85%); the bus being warmer and drier than walking
or cycling (83%); independence (82%); taking a bus being easier than
walking or cycling (75%); and no need to look for a car park (72%).
Students also perceived bus drivers as friendly (52%) and buses as an
environmentally friendly way to travel (60%) and safer than cycling
(63%).
The most frequently reported barriers to public bus use among
adolescents were cost, being driven around by parents, travelling long
distances, infrequent and slow bus service, unsuitable bus timetable and
lack of knowledge of the bus timetable (Table 6). Compared with bus
users, a greater proportion of students who were not using public bus
reported barriers associated with the public bus cost, waiting or getting
to the bus stop, lack of company for riding on the bus and lack of
knowledge of the bus timetable (Table 6). Non-bus users also reported
higher rates of being driven around by parents and of car ownership
and were less concerned with the bus frequency and timetables compared 
with bus users.

3.2. Survey of parents of adolescents in Dunedin: Findings from the BEATS

Parents (n = 350; parent age 47.5 ± 5.2 years; 77% females) of
secondary school students (student age 14.9 ± 1.6 years; 52% girls)
from all 12 Dunedin secondary schools completed the BEATS Parental

Survey (Mandic et al., 2020b). Overall, 72% of students used motorised
transport to school, 22% used active transport and 6% used mixed
modes. Nine percent of parents reported that their adolescent children
travel to school using public bus. The average distance to school was
How much are public buses used by adolescents for travel to/from school?
7.2 ± 8.4 km (median: 4.4 km; IQR: 2.4 km to 9.5 km), with no significant 
difference between parents whose adolescents travelled to
school by bus and those whose adolescents who did not. Overall, 24%
of parents reported having both public and school bus service available
near their home, 46% had public bus only, 21% had school bus only,
7% had no public or school bus service and 1% were unsure.
The most frequently reported parental barriers to public bus use
were adolescents’ extracurricular activities; perceived convenience of
car trip chaining; and the cost of public buses (Table 7.). Perceptions of
What are the schools’ perceptions of the barriers to & facilitators of adolescents’ use of
convenience of car trip chaining and living too close to school or too far
from a bus stop were significantly different between parents whose
adolescents travelled to school by public bus compared with their
counterparts who did not.

3.3. Findings from focus groups, interviews and open-ended survey

The qualitative insights from parents and adolescents showed the
importance of private motorised transport, particularly as this related to
perceived convenience, and cost. Convenient travel was interpreted as
What policies are likely to increase use of public buses for school travel?
“quick” and/or “easy” transport options, which in turn makes public
stated that “I like to be able to be flexible with my travelling times because
there is too much pressure to catch the bus at the right time when I can just

drive myself and not have to worry” [source: bus survey]. In turn, this                         
means that public bus transport becomes synonymous with a slower                                
speed, less reliability and lower frequency than alternatives – such as                         
the private car. Thus, perceptions of bus transport occur in direct relation 
to other transport modes, and are interpreted through the lens of                        
the dominant car-based transport system. For instance, participants                             

reflected on the perceived ‘time savings’ accrued from being driven to
school (by parents, caregivers, friends), which were interpreted in relation 
to time which may be spent waiting for and travel on buses.
Dunedin adolescents habitually use private vehicles for both school
and general travel purposes. This was coupled with parental practices,
and perceived convenience to drop their children at school en-route to
or from work, even when this means their offspring has to arrive much
earlier than required. For example, a parent stated that: “I think it’s just
whatever fits in with the parents, whatever makes it easier for the parents…
some children that I know of are being dropped off at school at like 8:00”
[parental focus group 4]. Trip chaining is perceived as normal, appropriate 
and convenient within the busy family life. Families highlight the
extra financial costs associated with bus travel when the car is taken out
already: “If you’re driving into work then it will cost you more to put your
kids on a bus, it’s cheaper just to drop them off” [parental focus group 2].
This was reiterated by students, who noted that the bus “needs to be
cheaper” and that “it costs way too much just for one zone” [bus survey].
While for some students their place of residence dictated their
choice of transport, others revealed that they had little input in the
decision making on their mobilities. For some, the distance to their
school was simply “too far” to use public transport, with participants
stating that: “service is out of reach to some places I need to go” [bus
survey]. Others did not have parental permission to use public transport
or sought to avoid potential disagreements with their parents or family
members. Moreover, many participants feared being late for school or
other activities, with the potential for negative repercussions deterring
them from using the bus: “Sometimes the buses are late and I might miss
out on an important event or school” [bus survey]. School principals also
highlighted that their pupils either arrive early or are late as public bus
schedules are not in synchronicity with the school day (see Table 3).
Participation in extracurricular activities also reinforces the use of
private vehicles, with students stating: “I am so busy and I have so many
activities to go to so I don't really go on the bus” [bus survey].
It was not only the unreliability of the bus schedule, but also the
infrequent running times of buses that create problems for adolescents
as “[t]ime table doesn’t work with what I want to do” [bus survey] and
there are “[n]ot enough busses running, there are like 45 min gaps” [bus
survey]. The low uptake of bus use is also linked to students’ lack of
knowledge of how to use Dunedin buses, their unfamiliarity with the
different routes, and managing the timetables. Therefore, it is not

surprising that many students voiced their concerns of selecting the
right bus for their needs, or missing their required stop and consequently 
alighting in an unfamiliar environment. As a result, the bus was
identified as a last resort – an option if all else failed. This means that
students are travelling by bus at a time of stress and/or pressure, thus
intensifying the experiences of uncertainty and time constraint.
Adolescents identified the bus, and those who travelled by bus, in
terms of the ‘loser cruiser’, which may underpin a concern of using this
mode, and of being associated with regular bus clients. This was articulated 
by a bus survey participant who said that buses “smell, [are]
filled with weirdos and strange people who can’t afford a car”. However,
some students developed coping strategies to make their experience on
the bus more pleasant, and quicker, for instance by taking an earlier,
less crowded bus. A student focus group participant stated that “There is
a difference between catching the 7:20 bus and the 7:30 bus. The 7:20 bus
will get you here about 7:30–7:35, whereas the 7:30 bus will get you here at
like 8:00; because it’s stopping and starting. It gets busier and it takes so
long, which is why I prefer going early” [student, focus group 8].

3.4. Policy analysis

Among the ten analysed policy documents, six explicitly discussed
transport to school (#2, #4, #5, #6, #8, #9, Table 4); two considered
public health from a transport perspective (#3, #8); and one approached 
public health from a physical activity perspective (#9)
(Copland, 2017). Four documents placed an emphasis on transport diversity: 
providing for both young, physically active people and elderly
or mobility-impaired transport-disadvantaged people (#4, #6, #8, #9).
Car dependence and the ways it manifests as an issue at different scales
was mentioned in several local documents but few documents explicitly
discussed how car dependence can be addressed. One document (#5)

identified greater use of public transport to school by adolescents as a
desirable goal. Yet public health was neither prioritised nor legislated
for in transport planning in New Zealand at that time, which focused
then on growth and viability. Dunedin appeared as an exception, as
strategic planning documents (e.g. #9) refereed to the intersections
between transport and public health.

3.5. Interviews with policy-makers in Dunedin

Three themes emerged from analysing interviews with policy-makers, 
relating to: barriers and enablers for using public transport; issue
of the current transport system and for developing an effective transport 
policy; and the role of policy for increasing public transport use
(Table 5).
Policy-makers noted the roles of pricing strategies and the cost of
using public transport as a potential barrier to bus uptake, and this is
understood in relation to – or competition with - other modes such as
private car. As the capital and annual fixed costs of car ownership are
often not directly considered by private vehicle drivers on a day-to-day
basis, the cost of bus transport needs to compete with the daily marginal 
costs of driving, such as parking and petrol. A DCC participant
reflected upon this, noting how “It’s actually very expensive to own a car,
but people don’t perceive it to be that way. You’ve got to keep it on the road,
and gas, and tyres and all that sort of thing”.
The pricing structure of bus transport was also seen in relation to
wider transport policies. For instance, in Queenstown, a town in the
Otago region, New Zealand, for which the ORC also plays a role in
transport planning, parking revenue directly supports subsidising the
bus system, thus allowing lower prices for the public bus compared
with other places in the country, such as Dunedin. An ORC participant
noted that “if we did something similar with the Dunedin City Council and
their parking revenue, we could introduce more competitive fares”, both
suggesting a possibility for reducing the cost of bus transport, but also
understanding the connections between private and public transport at
the policy level. A change in policy through “…car-parking charges or
road pricing might get the parents to change their behaviour” [DCC respondent].
The public buses are often used by students to travel to school, yet
these operate separately – with different management and pricing
structures – from school buses. While traditionally students used dedicated 
school buses, participants noted how changes in the national
policy was increasing the number of students using public buses, which
means that “[transport to school is] becoming more a part of our remit as a
council” (ORC respondent) and thus, “[the ORC] have made a decision in
their Regional Public Transport Plan that there isn’t really a need to fund
separate school services for kids, they can use the new (public) network”.
This raises questions about the suitability of their network for school
transport, the public/student mix, but also funding the public network

and the complex entanglement of and less than streamlined involvement 
of different agencies in providing bus services. One participant                           
argued:                                                                                         
												
“I think one of the areas you would conjure with is the division of											
responsibility between the Ministry of Education providing buses to											
school, and the public bus system (run by the ORC) to support kids											
to school, there is sort of two views aren’t there? I.e. we don’t want												
children polluting our normal [public] buses, but equally, I personally 
think that they could be a very useful sort of revenue to
support the public bus service” [DCC respondent]                                               										
It was clear that Dunedin policy-makers thought that health is about		

healthcare and treating illness, rather than about maintaining good
mental and physical health. The decisions made by the local and regional 
councils do not relate to public health objectives but are focused
on accessibility and safety, with one participant noting that “I think
traditionally public health hasn’t had a lot of influence on decision-making
… most of my professional career we’ve been very focused on doing no harm,
so safety’s been really important, so that’s driven down kids walking and
cycling to school” [DCC respondent]. At the regional scale this point was
also made, with a participant noting how:
“[the link between physical activity and public transport is] not
[emphasised in the Otago Regional Public Transport Plan], I mean I
don’t really know how we would incorporate it, because the plan is

sort of a ‘cover all’ type policy, and yeah we just have a lot of elderly        
and disabled, so it’s like trying to provide for two polar opposites”            
[ORC respondent]                                                                 
											
Changes to young people’s behaviours and practices, particularly at										
the intersection of technological innovation were identified as potential										
opportunities for incentivising bus travel. For instance, a participant										
from the NZTA noted: “You don’t want kids waiting for ages for a bus at a									
bus stop because there’s a perceived danger that people have. So, with											
technology, it can be ‘just in time’ type stuff, so that kids can get to the stop,											
the services are there and they can see where the bus is.” This can mean that								
the perceived safety of bus transport increases. As well as safety benefits, 
real-time information on smart devices was thought to make bus	
transport more appealing by offering accurate information on-the-go,	
an NZTA participant argued “anything on a smartphone is definitely more	
attractive to teenagers” [ORC Respondent]. Such real-time information	
could reduce uncertainty; reduce waiting times by facilitating users’	
appropriate arrival times at the bus stop; make bus use easier; and be an						
efficient method for easy payment.	
Such technologies also have the potential to offer better integration	
between modes, so that bus transport is no longer seen in isolation from		
other modes, such as active modes (walking, cycling) but also connectivity 
between types of public transport, taxi-hubs and more. An		
NZTA participant noted how “a key role for us is working towards really										
good integrated transport solutions as part of a whole system. So we are										
much more into the system thinking now… you can’t just think of it as once										
they [students] are on the bus they are done with […] So we’ve got to look at										
opportunities for people to maybe get off the bus and jump on the bike to get									
home, and then you know, it’s just making the whole thing more convenient									
and just giving more opportunities and choice really”.									
										
4. Discussion                                                                         
											
4.1. Barriers to school travel by public bus                                          
											
Most adolescents in Dunedin did not travel to school by bus. This                
trend differs from cities such as Vienna where most high school students              
travel by bus. However this is not to suggest that the bus is the preferred           
mode, as more than 80% of those Viennese bus users reported a preference 
for a different transport mode (Stark et al., 2019). Fig. 2 summarises 
the major barriers to Dunedin adolescents using public bus                    
transport to school: distance from home to school, cost, parental trip                
chaining, built environment features, the weather, the convenience of

car-based travel, the public bus services, including their infrastructure
and information, and safety concerns. Although a study of Hong Kong
adolescents found that perceived distance to public transport stops was
a significant factor influencing active travel in boys (Barnett et al.,
2019), distance to the bus stop was relevant in our study only when
there was no service that came to that locale. In line with studies
elsewhere (Berggren et al., 2019), waiting times and unpredictability of
service were also significant factors in determining positive perceptions
and use of public transport to school. Nevertheless, it is important to
note that Fan and colleagues highlighted how transit users generally
overestimate the time spent waiting but the presence of amenities, including 
benches and shelters, ameliorated this (Fan et al., 2016). This
suggests that perceived wait times may be exaggerated, and highlights
the important role infrastructure plays in overcoming these barriers.
The norm of families dropping off and picking up their children by
private car is consistent with the preference for car-based travel among
Dunedin adolescents (Hopkins et al., 2019). This leads to two important
policy considerations. First, inflexibility of workplace has meant a home
office option is rare; inflexibility of working hours precludes different
start times that would allow different transport options, such as the bus,
for both adolescents and their parents. Recent experiences of home-working 
during the COVID-19 pandemic may, however, change attitudes 
to home-working as a feasible option for office-based workers on
some, if not all, workdays or more flexible start and end times that suit
families’ needs better.
Skarin and colleagues pointed out the multiple ways in which
household members affect each other’s travel and recommended
focussing on household context, not just individual travel behaviours
(Skarin et al., 2017), and this is important here too. One fundamental
issue is that of choice of school, which is both influenced by household
resources and affects travel distances required and modes used (Jarvis
and Alvanides, 2008; Mandic et al., 2017b; Sandretto et al., 2020).
Secondly, the idea that good parents show their care for their off­spring 
through chauffeuring them around needs to be altered and socially 
sanctioned. This is particularly important given that parents play
a critical role in decision-making about adolescents’ mode of travel to
school (Mandic et al., 2020b). Instead, the benefits of using public
transport for adolescents’ independence and health (Goodman et al.,
2014) needs to be emphasised and be positioned at the centre of discussion, 
along with emphasising to adolescents the environmental impacts 
of their travel mode, as has been explored in Denmark (Møller
et al., 2018).

One encouraging aspect was the willingness of all 12 school principals 
for their school and themselves to be included in this research.
This is important, given findings in Canada that lack of involvement of
principals (and parents and students) was a key barrier to implementing
a school travel plan effectively (Mammen et al., 2015). Thus, it becomes
clear that a multi-actor and multi-institution (including government
agencies) response to shift attitudes and increase the adoption of active
and public transport modes is required, which takes into account the
relations between actors and institutions.
From the findings of this research, a number of policy recommendations 
emerged (Copland, 2017; Copland et al., 2017) to encourage 
Dunedin adolescents’ use of public buses for school travel.
Policy recommendations for both city and regional councils focused on
financial aspects, weather, safety and user needs. Additional city- and
region-specific recommendations were also outlined in the report prepared 
for the city and regional councils (Copland et al., 2017). It is clear
from the research that there is potential for cities to learn from one
another. Literature on urban policy mobilities (e.g. McCann, 2011) has
often focused on large cities, and between countries. However, our data
suggest there may be much for small cities to learn from one another
within one country.

4.2. Changes to policies over time

Analysis of the policy documents revealed that economic growth
and efficiency but not public health were the key considerations in
transport policy in the period to 2017. The exceptions were the strategic
planning documents for Dunedin, in which the effects of transport
choice on the public’s health was mentioned. There were also conflicting 
aims regarding public health. After this policy analysis was
conducted, a change of government and of national priorities for
transport in New Zealand occurred, with different outcomes prioritised,
including inclusive access, healthy and safe people, and environmental
sustainability (New Zealand Ministry of Transport, 2019).
The Land Transport Management Act (New Zealand Government,
2003) mandated regional government to plan for ‘transport-disadvantaged’ 
people; which in Dunedin results in bus stops being a
maximum of 400 m apart (in areas with bus routes). While this is
beneficial in reducing inequalities in access, it minimises the amount of
physical activity adolescents would obtain from walking or cycling to
and from bus stops to levels unlikely to contribute to their health
(Duncan et al., 2016). Nonetheless, the free bus travel scheme for young
people in London has encouraged greater use of bus transport for short
trips without significant impact on adolescents’ overall active travel
(Green et al., 2014), even when bus stops are in close proximity.
Policy-makers felt that enticing adolescents to use public transport
for school travel is challenging in a society with an embedded car
culture. However, interviews with policy-makers suggested a slow but
positive change, with new investment in Dunedin’s public bus network
and real-time information technology, at bus stops or using apps, to
increase the user-friendliness of public transport and address some of
the barriers mentioned by students, parents and school principals. Cats
and Loutos found that although apps underestimate waiting times, they
were much more accurate than timetables (Cats and Loutos, 2016).
Alternative ways of funding public transport were also being explored
by policy-makers such as a flat rate for young people. In London, the
provision of free bus travel to adolescents had increased bus use and
decreased travel poverty (Jones et al., 2012).
The findings from our study were used to develop a set of recommendations 
to inform policy-makers (Copland et al., 2017). Policy
documents published in the past two years have shown some shift. The
updated Otago Regional Transport Plan (2018), for the first-time, links
public health concerns and transport. The 2017 NZTA update of guidance 
on preparing regional transport policies focuses on public
transport (New Zealand Transport Agency, 2017). The 2018 version of
the Government Statement on Land Transport recommends the

importance of mode shift from private vehicle travel, particularly in
urban areas, and commits to increasing funding for walking, cycling,
public transport and road policing (New Zealand Government, 2018).
The strategic direction includes commitments to ‘mode-neutrality’ (i.e.
considering all modes), reversing the previous assumptions favouring
private cars, and to reducing greenhouse gas and adverse effects on the
local environment and public health. The updated Otago and Southland
Regional Land Transport Plan (Otago Regional Council and
Environment Southland Regional Council, 2018) has a focus on economic 
growth but also commits to improving both public transport and
safe walking and cycling linkages (including creating a network of cycle
trails in southern New Zealand), as well as actions to reduce serious
road travel injuries and deaths. In addition, recent policy recommendations 
for increasing active transport in New Zealand also
recommend improving public transport (Mandic et al., 2019, 2020a).
Since transport contributes about 40% of New Zealand’s carbon emissions 
(Statistics New Zealand, 2019), the government will need to develop 
a strategy with clear goals related to modal shift to achieve the
goals set in the recently approved Carbon Zero Act (New Zealand
Government, 2019).

4.3. Strengths and limitations of the studies

Strengths of this study include the multiple sets of data in one city.
The use of a comprehensive set of both qualitative and quantitative data
provides insights on perspectives of potential public bus use from
adolescents, parents, secondary school teachers, principals and policymakers 
and allows integration of those insights for a specific geographic
context.
Limitations include analysis of data gathered in only one city, which
limits generalisability of findings to other cities in New Zealand or internationally. 
However, that applies to many other studies of travel.
Importantly, our findings are very similar to those of studies elsewhere.
Also, we used data collected over an 8-year period. However, the rates
of adolescents using bus to school in Dunedin remained unchanged
between 2009 (22%; presented in the study) and 2014/2015 (21%)
(Mandic et al., 2015a,b).

5. Conclusions

Major barriers to Dunedin adolescents using public bus transport to
school included distance from home to school, cost, parental trip
chaining, built environment features, the weather, the convenience of
car-based travel, and safety concerns. If the goal is to increase public
transport use for adolescents’ school-related travel, effective policies
could include: increasing parking prices to discourage driving and tripchaining 
for parents; improving bus infrastructure and subsidies; and by
changing bus/bus users’ perceptions (Copland, 2017; Copland et al.,
2017). These initiatives will require collaboration between different
government authorities. A policy for public bus use by secondary school
students should be developed to address parental, adolescents’ and
schools’ concerns and encourage collaborations between government
authorities and schools.