Nuances of neighbourhood: Children’s perceptions of the space between
home and school in Auckland, New Zealand

This paper examines primary school children’s experiences of travelling between home and school within three neighbourhoods. Our
investigation is set in Auckland, New Zealand, where parental practices such as chauVeuring are commonplace, yet are increasingly recognised 
as limiting children’s physical fitness and environmental awareness. Drawing on children’s voices, writing and photographs, we
investigate how children currently travel to school, how they would like to travel, and how their perspectives on neighbourhood space
vary by age, socio-economic status and school location. Findings reveal that over half of the participants did not like the way they travelled 
to school. Most desire to travel independently within public space, but are limited in their ability to do so, given the fears and obstacles 
that prevail within their neighbourhoods. We contend that restricted use of public space diminishes children’s agency in inner
suburbs. Our analysis reveals that children favour ‘active travel’ for many of the same reasons as health professionals and transport planners. 
We conclude that as long as children are seen as innocents in need of protection, they will have limited agency in travel decisions and
highly contingent access to public space.

1. Introduction                                                                
										
The recent Xourishing of literature on children’s geographical 
experience has highlighted children’s competency                     
as social actors (Matthews and Limb, 1999; Fielding, 2000;                        
Prout, 2002; Barker, 2003). This recognition of agency is                      
signiWcant given that young people are among the most regulated 
groups in western societies (Scott et al., 1998). Moreover, 
the widespread adoption of chauVeuring behaviours                        
by parents is leading to children being denied opportunities                   
to use and explore their neighbourhoods. This denial occurs                    
notwithstanding the fact that “young people are constantly                     
engaged in risk assessment, actively creating and deWning                      
hierarchies premised upon diVerent discourses of risk as                       
‘normal’ and acceptable or ‘dangerous’ and out of control”                     
										
(Green et al., 2000, pp. 123–124). Children, in other words,
appear to bring capacities for agency to urban life even if
parentally-imposed structures neutralise it through control
and surveillance.
Recent Australian and New Zealand studies have considered 
the experience of children in urban areas, focussing
especially on the journey to and from school, and associated 
safety concerns (Collins and Kearns, 2001a; Collins
and Kearns, 2005; Kearns et al., 2003; Tranter and Pawson,
2001; Veitch et al., 2006). However, children’s voices have
only been partially represented in this work. This paper
reports on research that employed child-centred methods
to investigate primary-school aged children’s attitudes
towards mobility in public space, and their experiences of
neighbourhood life, specifically in terms of the agency they
can exert within journeys from home to school. In accessing
children’s perspectives through a range of methods we
contribute to an understanding of the emotional geographies 
of home and neighbourhood within the context of the										

autocentric city (Davidson et al., 2005). We contend that
restricted use of public space has diminished children’s
capacity to act and assess the local environment, and that
this, in turn, potentially inhibits their personal and social
growth.
A rationale for our study is that while public space may
play an important role in children’s personal development,
physical exploration and social growth (Freeman et al.,
2004; Kearns and Collins, 2006; Loukaitou-Sideris, 2003),
there is a common perception that they are out of place in
public space, especially when unaccompanied by an adult
(Collins and Kearns, 2001b). Trends towards privatizing
and supervising many aspects of children’s lives run contrary 
to claims that children need the ability and freedom to
explore their neighbourhoods and to do things on their
own (Franklin, 2002; Holloway and Hubbard, 2001).
Building on these contentions, we address three empirical 
objectives. First, we seek to understand how children
currently travel to school in Auckland City. We focus on
this trip as it is typically direct, whereas after-school journeys 
are often complicated by extra-curricular activities.
Second, we attempt to ascertain the ways in which children
desire to travel within their neighbourhoods, and identify
the constraints on realising these desires. The rationale for
this goal is that identifying constraints might provide a
platform for increasing children’s agency and opportunities
for experiencing local environments. Third, we seek to
investigate how children’s perspectives of their neighbourhoods 
vary by age, socio-economic status and school
location. The literature suggests that these variables are
significant inXuences on children’s lives. For example, children 
tend to be granted more independence as they grow
older (Hillman, 1993; Tranter and Pawson, 2001) and,
accordingly, their environmental experience increases with
age. At the same time, higher socio-economic status is generally 
associated with greater access to cars, and households 
having a greater propensity to drive children to
school, which reduces opportunities for children to explore
their neighbourhoods. School location may also inXuence
children’s experiences, with parents being more likely to
adopt chauVeuring behaviours when schools are sited near
busy roads (Tranter and Pawson, 2001).
This study builds on other work in children’s geographies 
(e.g., Valentine, 2004) in its attempt to understand
lived experience as a means of enhancing our picture of
children’s views of public space. We conceptualise the journey 
from home to school as reXecting wider societal attitudes 
towards children, particularly those which seek, to
greater or lesser extents, to provide protection or promote
freedom. We assume that if children are not travelling to
school free of adult supervision, it is unlikely that they will
be travelling elsewhere in public space independently.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
First, we review the literature on children’s experiences of
urban neighbourhoods, and the ways in which these experiences 
are structured by adult fears and decision-making.
We then outline the contexts for our research, describing

both Auckland City and the three neighbourhoods in
which the study was based. The third section identifies the
three main data collection methods used, the order in which
they were employed, and the nature of the classrooms
included in the study. In the following results section we
focus on children’s transport preferences and their perspectives 
of danger at the neighbourhood level. Finally, we reXect 
on our attempt to see the world through children’s eyes
and the implications of adopting this perspective.

2. Children’s experience of local urban environments

Walking between home and school enables children to
learn about the environment. Playing or hanging out with
friends may therefore be activities that are unremarkable
in adult eyes, but they are part of the experience of childhood 
(Cunningham et al., 1996). As Hardin (2000) argues,
the immediate neighbourhood potentially serves as an
important ‘local’ space that sits midway between the imagined 
safety of home and the perceived dangers of public
space. This said, the ‘local sphere’ (or neighbourhood) is
arguably being reconstructed as a landscape of risk
through such factors as fear of strangers and increases in
vehicular traYc. Being driven or constantly accompanied
by an adult in public space may prevent the simplest of
outdoor activities from promoting individuality, and compromise 
the development of autonomy. Children acting
autonomously in public space arguably build skills and
attitudes which may continue into adulthood (e.g., social
competency in public places; desires for active and sustainable 
travel) (Collins and Kearns, 2001a; Tranter and Pawson, 2001).
The presence of children in public space may also have
wider societal benefits, contributing to a sense of community, 
feelings of trust, and mutual support (Franklin, 2002).
Tranter and Pawson (2001) assert that communities can be
enhanced through encouraging the use of public space by
children, as their presence often helps to break down barriers 
between adults, and makes the streets more interesting,
liveable and communal. However, such claims potentially
underestimate the strength of the proverbial exhortation
‘don’t talk to strangers’, which strongly discourages children 
from interacting with – or even acknowledging –
unknown adults in the public domain. In addition, children
need opportunities in which to meet and socialise with each
other, separate from places controlled by teachers and parents 
(Simpson, 1997).
Arguably the first barrier that children encounter in
exploring their neighbourhoods stems not from issues of
design, or potential risks, but rather from the prevalent
social construction of children as dependent, vulnerable and
in need of constant adult guidance and supervision. This is
the underlying basis for limiting children’s spatial freedoms,
and their exclusion from decision-making and planning
processes (Hill et al., 2004). Adult(ist) decision-making
creates barriers to children’s mobility and can lead to children 
feeling out of place in their ‘own’ neighbourhoods

(Christensen and O’Brien, 2003). Parental restrictions on
children’s activities – in the name of safety, convenience
and/or local expectations – are one dimension of this displacement, 
as Dowling (2000) found in her study of mothering 
and car use in Sydney, Australia. Moreover, the time and
space available for children to explore on their own or interact 
with others appears to be progressively shrinking in
developed nations (Loukaitou-Sideris, 2003). Thus children’s 
geographies are dually limited, in terms of both access
to space and access to people: children rarely meet each
other outside of school and family relationships. The children’s 
geographies literature has shown that these limitations 
potentially keep younger children shut oV from the
wider world, and from opportunities to socialise and experience 
a variety of ideas, spaces and people (e.g., Valentine,
1996a; Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002).
The growth and intensification of urban areas, together
with increased car usage, have coincided with child pedestrian 
accidents becoming a leading cause of injuries and
fatalities in New Zealand (Collins and Kearns, 2001a,
2005). As individual parents can do very little to improve
the hostile traYc environment for the benefit of all children,
many respond by seeking to protect their children from perceived 
dangers. A similar approach prevails in schools: in
New Zealand, for example, police oYcers are brought into
primary schools to teach children how ‘to cross the road
safely’ – in other words, to deal with the adult world of
traYc. This process does not address the problem of adult
drivers being given priority over children. Health educators
“ƒ want to teach children to be careful and to be scared,
rather than look into limiting the traYc” (Davis and Jones,
1996, p. 109), ignoring the fact that these education measures 
have proven to be less eVective than anticipated (Roberts et al., 2002).
Returning to our earlier theme of agency, the location
and spatial extent of adult responsibility for children is a
recurring theme in public policy and debate. Children are
given responsibilities in some areas of their lives, such as
chores around the home, and these duties promote power
and responsibility (Such and Walker, 2004). However
when it comes to being accountable for their own lives
there is often a retraction of responsibility as children continue 
to be viewed by parents and caregivers as ‘vulnerable
innocents’ (Valentine, 1996b). In prevalent Western adult
understandings, children are almost invariably seen as
being unable to make (sensible) decisions for themselves,
and as vulnerable to dangers in unsupervised environments.
By way of example, Loukaitou-Sideris’ (2003) study of
four urban sites in southern California found that only 16%
of seven year olds were allowed to go further than a block
without an adult, and 30% of 11–12 year olds had not visited 
a public space on their own. Further, Cunningham and
Jones (1999) discovered that only 6% of Australian children
played outside within their own neighbourhoods. As the
built environment continues to become more intimidating,
children are becoming more marginalised, with diminished

access to safe places to journey within and explore, due in
large part to parental restraints. This trend has been
observed in a range of studies in Australia (Dowling, 2000),
New Zealand (Collins and Kearns, 2001a; Tranter and
Pawson, 2001) and the UK (Valentine and McKendrick,
1997; Valentine, 1997a,b; Hillman et al., 1990), demonstrating 
that children’s independence is being fundamentally
compromised to create the appearance of good parenting.
Tranter and Pawson’s (2001) study of four schools in
Christchurch, New Zealand, noted that this social pressure
was strongest in the school neighbourhood with the highest
socio-economic status, where a particularly protective parenting 
culture had developed.
One reported result of this trend is that children develop
an ‘island geography’ comprising locations that they are
chauVeured to and from, eVectively preventing first-hand
experience of what Hardin (2000) called the ‘local sphere’ in
between such destinations. As Tranter and Pawson (2001)
claim, while children may be seeing more, as passive passengers 
they are learning less. Parents, realising they have
placed spatial restrictions on their children, often respond
with additional extra-curricular activities, and by accompanying 
their children to specific recreational destinations
such as parks. Travel to these destinations is typically by
car.
Secondly, chauVeuring limits children’s opportunities to
learn how to function safely in the urban environment
(Timperio et al., 2004). Children often realise that there is a
world they are being deprived of, and articulate desires for
opportunities to explore and learn more about it (Tranter
and Pawson, 2001). This said, O’Brien et al. (2000) discovered 
that a highly protected life does not necessarily lead to
impoverished peer relations or unhappiness. Indeed, some
children can be content with this lifestyle. However, the
very act of chauVeuring does lead to a restriction on children’s 
experiential geographies (Valentine, 1996b). Passive
transporting (rather than active mobility) may also impact
upon adult life, as the ‘chauVeured child’ potentially
becomes another car dependent adult.
At least partially as a response to adult fear, children are
also being increasingly placed in adult-supervised afterschool 
activities, contributing to lives of near-constant surveillance 
(Smith and Barker, 2000, 2001). O’Brien et al.
(2000) link a new culture of indoor play to the embedded
cultural orientation of the family: specifically, the interiorisation 
of children’s leisure is connected to a pervasive privatism. 
A recent Auckland study revealed parents in one
suburb to be reluctant to have neighbourhood children into
their home for fear of theft or disruptive behaviour (Witten
et al., 2003). In summary, the lack of parentally acceptable
unsupervised play spaces, a fear of strangers and traYc
dangers, and the unwillingness of parents to encourage
their children to play outdoors have, in combination, created 
a generation of children who are largely unfamiliar
with their local neighbourhood and dependent upon the car
– something that is readily apparent within our study site,
Auckland City.

3. Research setting

Auckland City (population 405,000) is one of the four
constituent cities within the Auckland metropolitan region
(population 1.3 million – 2006 est.). Between 1991 and 2006
the City’s population grew by 32.2%. Auckland’s growth
has prompted a ‘suburban squeeze,’ with widespread infill
housing and increasing residential densities catering to the
increased population. These trends have contributed to a
loss of outdoor play spaces for children (Kearns and Collins, 2006). 
The traditional ‘quarter-acre’ suburban property, 
for example, is rapidly becoming an historical artefact.
Auckland City has a related reputation for traYc congestion, 
which causes considerable political debate and
demands for government action. On an average weekday,
nearly 50% of morning peak journeys are work-related and
another 40% are attributed to schools or other educational
institutions (Auckland City Council, 2004). Walking has
long been poorly regarded by planners and municipal politicians 
in Auckland (Bean, 2006). This view has become
inscribed in Auckland’s infrastructure with, for example,
variable upkeep of older sidewalks and a lack of safe places
to cross many busy roads. This situation is slowly being
addressed with a new local government focus on promoting
walking and cycling, although traYc remains, from the perspective 
of many parents in particular, an extreme hazard
for children. As a result, many parents rely on private
motor vehicles for transporting children. This situation suggests 
sedentary lifestyles and lost opportunities for children
to explore their local neighbourhoods.
To pursue our empirical objectives, three Auckland primary 
(elementary) schools were selected as study sites, and
work was undertaken by the first author with children in
two classes at each school. In the hope of gaining a broadbased 
understanding of children’s experiences of neighbourhood, 
we first determined that the selected schools
should represent a range of positions on the socio-economic 
scale (in terms of the New Zealand school system,
this meant schools from deciles 1, 5 and 10).1 Letters outlining 
the study were sent to the principals of five randomlyselected 
schools from each of the chosen deciles, giving
them the option to agree to or decline the opportunity for
involvement in the research. The initial response rate was
low, and only two acceptances were received. Non-responding 
schools were then contacted by phone, and personal
contacts were used to assist recruitment. Ultimately, a willing 
school at each level was identified.
The participating primary schools were Maungawhau
Primary School (decile 10), Mount Roskill Primary School

All New Zealand state-funded schools are ranked according to the
socio-economic characteristics of the areas their pupils live in. Decile 1
schools are the 10% of schools with the highest proportion of pupils drawn

from areas of low socio-economic status, while decile 10 schools are the
10% of schools with the fewest such pupils. A proportion of government

funding is linked to this classification system, with Decile 1 schools receiving 
the most assistance, and Decile 10 schools the least.

(decile 5), and Waterview Primary School (decile 1). Maungawhau 
Primary is set in Balmoral/Mt. Eden, a central-west
neighbourhood of Auckland. It takes its name from a
nearby volcanic cone, the highest on the Auckland isthmus.
The neighbourhood has undergone extensive gentrification
since the 1980s. Subsequently, the area has an established
reputation as a desirable location for families to purchase
residential property and ensure access to what is regarded
as a high quality public (state) school. Although bounded
by two busy arterial roads, the streets within this suburb are
relatively quiet; all have footpaths, and many have traYccalming 
measures. There are also a number of parks and
diverse retail sites within the area. Students are primarily of
New Zealand European (‘Pakeha’) background.
Mt. Roskill Primary is located in the suburb of the same
name, also taken from a distinctive volcanic cone, and is in
a high-traYc area with five major arterial routes nearby. In
the 1950s and 1960s the suburb of Mt. Roskill epitomised
the New Zealand ‘quarter-acre’ dream (see Ferguson,
1994), with ample lot size, and appealing streets and footpaths. 
Located approximately 10 km from downtown
Auckland, it is now one of the most ethnically diverse areas
in the region, and home to many international students,
migrants, and refugees (Lawrence and Kearns, 2005).
Roads in the immediate vicinity of the school are acutely
congested, and widely regarded as dangerous for children.
Waterview Primary School is set within a residential
area characterised by public housing, close to the North-Western 
Motorway. However, aside from one major arterial 
road running through part of Waterview, local streets
are relatively quiet. It is a poorer area, reXected in a number
of boarded-up shops. Waterview Primary is the smallest of
the schools included in the study, and most of its pupils are
of Polynesian descent.

4. Research process and methods

Once permission to carry out the research at their
schools was gained, principals were asked to nominate two
participating classes, one junior (pupils aged 6–7 years) and
one senior (pupils aged 10–11 years), and to gain the consent 
of relevant teachers. Each class had a minimum of 15
children participating in each research activity. Data collection 
activities were carried out both within the classrooms
and within small discussion groups of five to eight children.
The teachers of the nominated classes were asked to invite
children to participate in the discussion group. In accordance 
with ethical requirements, information sheets about
the study were then sent to the parents and children verbally 
agreed to participate.
We deemed story-writing activities to be a useful way to
collect both narrative and enumerative data from the classroom. 
Creative writing is a central component of children’s
learning in New Zealand primary schools and we sought to
capitalise on children’s familiarity with this concept. Two
writing activities were conducted in each participating class
over consecutive weeks. The first author was present during

all activities, introducing the topics to the children and
prompting them with questions to further understanding of
the topic.
Topic One, entitled “My journey to school”, was aimed
at addressing the first study objective by gathering data
about the modes of transport used by children and who, if
anyone, they travelled with. It included the question, “What
do you see along the way?” which was intended to assess
whether children’s understandings and experiences of
neighbourhood varied according to their mode of travel (cf.
Tranter and Pawson, 2001). Topic Two addressed the second 
research objective and asked children to complete a
sentence about the way they would like to come to school,
explain their reasons, and comment on if they were unable
to meet this aspiration. The children were asked to keep
their transport preferences to realistic ways of travelling
(discouraging the proposed use of magic carpets, Xying
horses, etc.). Both topics also yielded information relating
to our third objective, as they were conducted in two diVerent 
classes at each of the three selected schools, which were
separated by significant spatial and socio-economic distances.
These writing activities constituted an initial method
employed to generate a broad picture of the range of children’s 
views. A deeper understanding was subsequently
sought via discussion groups. As in focus groups (Cameron,
2005), while there were general topics to be discussed, the
children guided the conversation themselves and set their
own agenda, with only occasional prompts and requests for
elaboration from the researcher. Each of the discussion
group sessions ended in general dialogues about participants’ 
neighbourhoods, their perceived dangers and any
aspects they would like to change. Sessions were audiotaped, 
with consent, and then transcribed.
We addressed the aim of gaining insight into what children 
perceived to be dangerous for people their age
through use of photovoice (Wang et al., 1998), an actionresearch 
methodology which is underpinned by the idea
that people are ‘experts’ on their own lives and therefore
should be empowered to play a prominent role in research
about them. Photovoice typically involves providing marginalised 
individuals with a camera “ƒ so they can record
and represent their everyday realities” (Wang et al., 2004, p.
75). As the approach intentionally attempts to empower
participants with little money, power or status, young people 
can potentially benefit from engaging with photovoice
(e.g., Aitken and Wingate, 1993; Kroeger et al., 2004;
McAllister et al., 2005; Strack et al., 2004). The photovoice
activity occurred in the Wrst week of contact with each
school and involved walking with children around their
immediate neighbourhood and asking them to record
whatever they perceived as dangerous using disposable
cameras.
The cameras were shared between the participating children 
(juniors: three cameras per six children; seniors: two
cameras per six children), and each took turns at taking
photos. The researcher and participants were accompanied

by a teacher’s assistant in order to meet ethical requirements, 
as well as to ensure the peace of mind of any potentially 
concerned parents. Both adults avoided input into
decisions as to what to photograph. One week later, the
participating children were invited to gather around the
photos and discuss the dangers they saw in them. These discussions 
ended in general conversation about the children’s
neighbourhood, its dangers, and the aspects they wished to
change.
With the approval of the school administrators and
teachers of the classes, the writing, which was completed at
each of the case study schools, was collated and photocopied. 
The numbers of children varied slightly between classes
and activities, with 131 children participating in writing
activity one and 136 in writing activity two. There was an
even representation of junior and senior contributors. Gender 
and ethnicity were not recorded, as this study’s focus
was on the ways in which travel and use of public space varied 
according to the children’s age, and the socio-economic
status and location of their school.

5. Children’s experiences of home–school travel

Of the 131 children participating in the first activity
(which involved writing about the predominant way in
which they travelled to school), 55.7% made the journey
accompanied by an adult, either by private car (39.7% of all
participants), walking (14.5%), or some other means (1.5%).
A total of 44.3% of children travelled independently or with
peers (14.5% and 29.8%, respectively) (Table 1).
While the majority of the study participants reported
being accompanied en route to school, almost 45% travelled 
by themselves or in the company of other children
only. Many Auckland children, then, appear to enjoy a
measure of independence and autonomy. This trend was
not uniform across diVerent age groups, but nor was it as
diVerent as one might expect given the diVerences in maturity 
levels involved: 40% of juniors travelled unaccompanied 
by an adult, compared to 48.5% of seniors. Adult
accompaniment of pupils was particularly marked at
Maungawhau Primary (in the most aZuent neighbourhood), 
where 75% of juniors and 55% of seniors travelled to
school with an adult. The lowest accompaniment rate was
at Mt. Roskill, where 50% of both juniors and seniors travelled 
with adults.

In conversation, children who did not walk were well
aware that they were missing out on learning opportunities.
Consistent with trends observed in Norway (Sjolie and
Thuen, 2002), Britain (Hillman et al., 1990), and elsewhere
in New Zealand (Tranter and Pawson, 2001), the boredom
of being chauVeured was a common theme in the children’s
writing.
“I do not like coming to school the way I do, because
you can’t do anything. You see the same things every
time” (MJ – Car)2

“I don’t like travelling to school in a vehicle because
it’s boring inside a car” (RS – Car)
By contrast, children who walked to school, either individually, 
or with peers or parents, were particularly positive
about this journey. While some complained of getting tired,
respondents at all three schools valued the social nature of
walking. Thus, one student commented “I really like the
way I get to school, because I don’t get lonely and me and my
friend can talk to each other” (MS). Socialising with their
peers is a primary need and desire of children (Baraldi,
2003; Driskell, 2002); walking to school helps this to be
achieved (see also Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).
Exercise and exploring the environment were also perceived 
advantages of walking:

“When you’re walking, you don’t need to hop in the
car ƒ you get to play hide and seek and chase and
you get energy and fit” (MJ – walks with peers)
“I like walking to school because it’s fun and the sun
shines bright. I don’t get bored” (MJ – walks unaccompanied)

“It gives you energy and is good for your bones” (WS
– walks with parent)

These type of comments were commonly oVered and reXect
an internalisation of health promotion rhetoric which has
emphasised that children need regular exercise to keep
healthy. It appears that curiosity keeps children interested
in walking between home and school, despite the ‘sameness’
that might be identified by some adults. Children invent
and play games during their walk home and investigate
interesting sites along the way.
Through their writing, some children gave examples of
exercising, and negotiating agency. These participants
appeared to be challenging, at least implicitly, the structures 
constraining their everyday lives, by making their
own decisions about travelling to school – and opting for
walking because of the independence and experiences it
brings.

“I tell my mother to let me go in the car today and
tomorrow I can go by walking and the next morning I
said “let’s go by walking” (RJ – Walks with parent).

“She [mum] asked me if I wanted to go by car but I
said ‘no’ so I walked to school.” (WS – Walks unaccompanied)
As well as highlighting desires to walk to school, these comments 
also contribute to the idea of children and parents
negotiating ‘licences’, which specify the nature and extent
of children’s spatial freedoms (Hillman et al., 1990; Tranter
and Pawson, 2001; Valentine, 1997c, 2000).
Of the three case study schools, Mt. Roskill students
demonstrated the highest levels of independent walking to
school (i.e., without an adult): 65% were accompanied at
Maungawhau, 53% at Waterview, and 50% at Mt. Roskill.
This Wnding was surprising, given that Mt. Roskill Primary
is located in the most heavily traYcked area. However, further 
investigation revealed that, compared to the other
schools, a larger proportion of children from Mt. Roskill
Primary were travelling in the company of other young
people – not only children of their own age, but also siblings 
attending the adjacent intermediate (junior high) and
high schools. While a campus with more than one school
can be perceived as negative (e.g., due to the concentration
of vehicular traYc), benefits can be seen with younger children 
being given greater opportunities for active travel.
Maungawhau and Waterview Primary pupils do not have
the same opportunity to be accompanied by significantly
older siblings on the journey to school.

5.1. Children’s transport preferences

Of the 136 children participating in the second writing
activity (how they would like to travel) 20 expressed a
desire for unrealistic means (despite exhortations to avoid
such alternatives). These responses were therefore left out
of the analysis. The remaining results are recorded in Table
2. Of the 53.4% of children currently walking to school,
half (i.e., 25.9% of the total) were content with their mode
of transport. Respondents reported that they enjoyed
walking to school because of the social interaction, perceived 
health benefits and the pure ‘fun’ of it. According to
one, “it’s nice to walk with my brother because we can talk
about stuV” (MS). A desire to avoid the traYc jams and the
boredom of being trapped in a car were additional reasons
quoted by Mt. Roskill senior children. Seeing the traYc
chaos outside their school every morning and having the
ability to walk faster than the travelling cars appeared to
give these children first hand experience of the disadvantages 
of private transport and benefits of walking (cf.
Kearns et al., 2003).
While few children reported cycling to school, all of
represent
those who were cyclists wished to persist with this form of
and S            transport. They stated that cycling was fun and faster than
walking, and less boring than private transport. One child

added that it was “friendly to the environment” (RS) recognising 
that cycling is a zero emission form of transportation.
Over half (53.4%) of children who wrote about their
travel preferences stated a wish to change their current
mode of transport. We now explore the explanations
oVered by these children. Of those currently being driven,
almost half (45%) expressed a desire for a more active
travel mode (i.e., walking or cycling/roller skating), and an
additional 13% favoured public transport, which typically
oVers some opportunity for exercise in the form of walking
to and from stops. Several themes emerged to explain this
desire to step out of the car and into public space, the first
being an enthusiasm for exploring the local environment.
As Valentine and McKendrick’s (1997) research in northwest 
England found, many children have a strong urge to
explore their surroundings and experience things first hand,
rather than through the passive interactions that private
transport oVers:

“I would really like to walk the whole way, even if it
was raining. Nature is beautiful and I love to look at
it ƒ overall I love walking, it’s fun and special in it’s
own wonderful way” (MS – practice: car, desire:
walk)

“I can feel the breeze on my face ƒ see beautiful Xowers, 
dogs and cats, but I can only do that if I ride my
bike” (MS – practice: car, desire: cycle)

“I want to see stuV” (RS – practice: car, desire: walk)

By expressing that she wants to walk, even in the rain, the
quoted Maungawhau senior displays a deep desire to
change the way she travels to school. She wants to enjoy
walking, an act which for many adults in ‘autocentric’
Auckland is highly marginal, seldom engaged in as a form
of everyday mobility (Bean, 2006). Another child stated,
with frustration “you don’t get to see much in a car” (MS).
Despite the simplicity of their words, these children realise
that they are missing out on exploring opportunities by
being transported in private vehicles. However unremarkable, 
activities such as picking up leaves and pinecones and
merely “seeing stuV”, are all actions which work towards
giving children an understanding about their environment
and, ultimately, a sense of place (Cunningham et al., 1996).
Social interaction was a second common theme to
emerge in children’s writing. A desire to interact with

friends and others on the street was mentioned as a primary
reason why they wanted to change from their current mode
of transport:

“I would be able to say hello to people and get to

know people” (MJ – practice: car, desire: walk)


“I would rather bike because then I can talk to my

friends” (MS – practice: car, desire: cycling)


“You get a good view from the bus and your friends

might be there” (RS – practice: car, desire: public
transport)
While some children imagined themselves travelling with a
small group of friends, others dreamed on a grander scale,
envisioning all children catching the same mode of public
transport to school:

“I would like to come to school by going in a bus with
all my friends because I like talking and laughing with
my friends” (WS – practice: car, desire: public transport)

“It would be cool if there was a tram that went from
Mt. Eden to a meeting point. And every kid would
walk or run to the meeting point and the tram would
take them to school” (MS – practice: car, desire: public transport)
Significantly, these comments show children’s willingness

to travel by public transport. It is plausible that their perceptions 
stem from partaking in school trips, during which
a whole class travels together on one bus, making it an
enjoyable, if noisy, trip for all. Any notion that public
transport is anti-social (whereby passengers sit silently side
by side) is clearly not evident to children.
A third theme children articulated was a desire to use a
more active form of transport as a means to stay healthy,
both physically and mentally, and increase their fitness
levels.

“I would like to get energy, get healthy and brainy”

(WJ – practice: car, desire: walk)

“I want to walk because it’s fun and when you come
to school you have a good mind” (RS – practice: car,
desire: walk)

“I could get more fresh air than from being stuVed in
a car” (MS – practice: car, desire: cycle)

Children are aware that exercise is necessary for a well-balanced 
life. They have likely picked this concept up from a
number of sources: their parents, the news media, and
school. Children not only absorb health-promoting messages, 
but also want to take steps to enact them, realising
the benefits which can be gained (Kearns et al., 2003). The
cognitive benefits perceived by two of the pupils quoted
above may relate to the popular idea (in New Zealand)
that, in walking to school, children arrive more alert than
would be the case if they had been driven, thus making
walking good for mental as well as physical health (see
Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).
The theme of the ‘need for speed’ also featured throughout 
this part of research, with children frequently expressing a 
preference for transport that would be faster than
driving in a congested city:
“You can dodge traYc” (RS – practice: car, desire:
cycle)


“I’ve always been in a car since I was little, so I would
like to cycle, it would be faster” (WS – practice: car,
desire: cycle)

It seems that children desire to investigate their environment 
both deeply (e.g., looking at plants, experiencing the
elements, on their journey) and broadly (e.g., seeing and
covering as much space as they can). In summary, writing
activity two showed that 60.5% of the surveyed children
expressed a desire to use an active mode of transport, and
an additional 9.4% favoured public transport. The number
of children who, at the time of the research, walked or
cycled/roller skated is slightly lower (59.5% in writing activity 
one; 56.0% in writing activity two), while almost no children 
presently use public transport for their journey to
school.

5.2. Children’s perceptions of barriers and dangers

As many children express a desire to utilise active modes
of transport on their journey to school, but are unable to
act upon it, the question remains: what is stopping them
from travelling as they would like? The children who
answered this question oVered one unmistakable theme:
“I’m not allowed”. While parentally-imposed barriers to
children’s active travel may be motivated by a wide range
of factors, they are most often explained to children in
terms of safety concerns. This was particularly marked for
children attending Mt. Roskill Primary, which – as noted

above – is located in a highly congested area:

“I can’t because I’m not allowed to be by myself” (RJ
– practice: car, desire: walk).

“Mum doesn’t let us near dangerous things” (RS –
practice: car, desire: walk).

“My mum says it’s too dangerous when it’s not. She
worries too much about me. I am 11 years old, old
enough to look after myself” (RS – practice: walk,

desire: cycle).

The case study children were all too aware how their parents 
felt about them using public space, with most being
specific about their parents’ fears vis-à-vis both traYc and
stranger dangers. While children desire to use other modes
of transport, restrictions from parents frequently prevent
this. Consequently, congestion around the school gate and
traYc on the roads continue to increase as parents chauVeur 
their children. The other common issue constraining
children’s ability to utilise active transport was the simple
fact that they lived too far away from school to utilise their
‘preferred’ transport options, given limitations of time and
stamina.
In addition to eliciting comments regarding the journey
between home and school, we also considered children’s
perspectives on neighbourhood dangers more generally,
particularly via the final research activity – a researcher-led
walk around a block considered representative of each
school’s neighbourhood. During this activity children were
asked to photograph whatever they thought was ‘dangerous’ 
to children of primary school age. The most pertinent

discovery was the existence of clear diVerences between the
schools: children attending Waterview Primary were most
concerned about strangers and being alone in a public
space; Mt. Roskill Primary pupils highlighted roads and
traYc; and Maungawhau Primary children were troubled
by lower-order issues that might be dismissed as trivial.
Overall, frustration with traYc and road dangers was the
most frequently recorded complaint (see Table 3). Over half
of the photos featured road traYc related phenomena,
which were also preoccupations of the children in the writing 
and discussion activities. TraYc-related fears and complaints 
were widespread, but featured most with the Mt.
Roskill juniors. This observation confirms the view that
children perceive traYc to be the greatest threat to children
of their age, aligning with parental fears and academic
research (Collins and Kearns, 2005; Baraldi, 2003; Christensen 
and O’Brien, 2003; Tranter and Pawson, 2001; Valentine, 
2001). One picture taken by a Mt. Roskill junior is
significant for its illustration of just how threatening a car is
to a child of primary school age, who cannot see over the
roof or through the windows (see Fig. 1).
When the young photographer was asked what it represented 
to her, she answered

“Cars can run over the kids when they come out of

school. There’s parked cars as well, so you can barely

see. I took the photo because you have to stick your

head behind the cars to see the road and they could
hit you” (RJ).

Mt. Roskill seniors also commented on the intense congestion 
around their school, such as in this dialogue during a

discussion group:


RS Boy 1: Too many adults come to school and
work by car causing too much pollution and traYc
jams.

RS Boy 2: There’s too much traYc on [the] road so
children are late to school.

RS Girl 1: There are too many cars and not enough
pedestrian crossings.

RS Girl 2: Yeah, and the traYc is just zooming ƒ
without slowing down or stopping.

Speeding cars were also discussed by the children. There
was particular concern that the drivers, especially near the
school, were not cautious enough about looking out for
children and obeying the road rules.

“Cars are always driving past (the school gate), especially 

before school and after school and it’s really
dangerous for kids” (RJ).

“Speeding cars run over children and if you don’t realise 
that a car is coming and try to cross over you
could get squished, and if you don’t die you would be
in a lot of pain” (MS)

“The cars are going way too fast and they don’t stop
at the lights” (WS)
All the participants were aware that, because drivers are
not as careful as they should be, children need to take

responsibility for themselves. This internalisation of
responsibility may be interpreted as reXecting a degree of
competence among children in terms of independently
negotiating the dangers of public space, but perhaps also
points to the possibility of children blaming themselves in
the event of an accident (see Roberts et al., 1997, 2002). An
example of self-blame was seen in a conversation during the
Maungawhau Primary senior discussion group, when a
child spoke of a waste truck that was observed (and photographed) 
reversing around a corner near their school dur
six year old’s eye – picture by Mt. Roskill Junior.

ing their neighbourhood walk. The children recognised the
waste truck as a hazard that children have to encounter and
cope with, and added that if an accident happened, the
child was most likely to blame.
While the streets were viewed as hazardous, children
viewed their school as a safe zone. School was generally
cast as a place of refuge where they were away from the
dangers and hostilities of the outside world, thus suggesting 
its centrality (along with, for most, home) to their emotional 
geographies of neighbourhood (see Davidson et al.,
2005). This was highlighted through written comments
such as “we safely cross the road and head to school. We are
safely in the school grounds” (RS). This view of the school
as a ‘safe haven’ aligns with one of the original intentions
for schooling, which was to keep children from being
exposed to the ‘evils’ of the world (Eekelaar, 1986; Prentice,
1977). This interpretation of public space as a negative
inXuence in children’s lives has continued, manifesting in
the minds of children as well as adults. When children were
asked “what is school like compared to outside?” they
responded unanimously that “it’s safer”. Another girl
commented “sometimes I get scared walking to school
because I walk with my little brother who is 7 years old. I
feel scared because someone might kidnap my precious
brother” (RS).
In some children fear of public space was not the primary 
concern, but rather a lack of opportunities to use it.
Others expressed frustration about the diYculties and
ambiguities of public space. Children, especially from the
high socio-economic status Maungawhau Primary, wanted
the opportunity to use public space but felt they could not.
The root of this problem was the lack of urban spaces tailored 
to children’s recreational needs:

“When you’re riding your bike the law says that you
have to ride your bike on the road, but parents would
never let you do that. But the footpath is just as bad,
cars are on the road and on the footpaths, because
they are backing out of their driveways” (MS).

“The footpath is too narrow to ride bikes on and pass
people” (MS)

Both of these children express frustration at the inability to
ride their bikes in dense suburban areas. Cyclists are not
supposed to travel on the footpaths (which in any case are
by no means free from danger), while the risks of cycling on
the road are irrefutable (and feature prominently in the
minds of many parents). A third option, increasingly common 
in Auckland, is shared cycle/bus lanes. These did little
if anything to address the problem:

MS Girl 1: “When you’re riding your bike, it’s fun,

but the roads are too wide and the footpaths are like

this small [indicates with hands]. There’s bike lanes on
a couple of roads around here, but you can’t ride in
those because your parents won’t let you, because a
car might swerve and hit you

MS Girl 2: “And the bike lanes ƒ they have buses
travelling in them! Bikes are so small and buses are
really, really big, like 2000 times bigger. Lots of kids
get freaked out if they get near a bus”
While safety was a concern for children from a higher
socio-economic background, the Maungawhau Primary
pupils were more concerned about recreational activities
and having social time with their friends. Although children
retain the ability to make and shape space, even under
adverse conditions – indeed, this is a prominent theme in
the international literature on children’s geographies
(Jones, 2000; Swart-Kruger and Chawla, 2002) – the combination 
of chauVeuring, privatised recreational activities,
and parental prohibitions on independent play and travel
may have largely removed children of higher socio-economic 
backgrounds from inner Auckland public spaces. In
the case of Maungawhau, children appeared resigned to the
fact that the situation in their neighbourhood was not
going change and they would continue to be confined to
play in ‘safe’ private space.

In addition to the principal fears of traYc and public
space, children discussed other aspects of urban life which
they considered dangerous. Uneven pavements were commonly 
mentioned, with children expressing concern over
tripping on the cracks and lumps as they walked (or ran) in
public space. “The front of your foot could fall into it and
you could get a big bruise and lots of scrapes” (MJ – see
Fig. 2). Others commented that the uneven and broken
pavement was “all dirty and you could fall over. It doesn’t
look very nice” (RJ).
Litter was also a frequently-photographed phenomenon.
While children acknowledged that some litter was not necessarily 
‘dangerous’, they commented that it was unsightly
and that they would prefer a clean and tidy neighbourhood.
The case study children took notice and commented on
almost everything they passed throughout the walk around
the neighbourhood. Even specks of glass did not go unnoticed, 
presumably because Auckland children commonly
walk in bare feet.
A ‘danger’ which only featured in the (gentrifying)
neighbourhood of Maungawhau was that of houses being
refurbished. The houses pictured in Fig. 3 were on a road
bordering the school. Both construction sites blocked the
sidewalk, one with setting concrete and the other with a
large hole and a token cone warning of its presence. They
were seen to be a danger to the safety of those walking to
and from school, although sometimes this concern became
fanciful.

“These people are doing concrete on the driveway
and they’ve got these four wooden things and two

trucks ƒ and if kids get stuck in the cement they

could stay there for ever and ever and die” (MJ).

While a general wariness of traYc and strangers was identifiable 
across all schools, specific fears permeated some
groups of children more than others. Waterview children,

for instance, expressed concerns about stranger danger,
recounting stories of people to be feared in their area, and
the places they are known to frequent. Yet, despite the fear
of strangers, the Waterview neighbourhood displayed a
degree of social connectedness that was not shown within
the other case study schools: for example, the children
knew and spoke of people who lived in the area who were
not part of the school community.
Mt. Roskill pupils were primarily concerned with the
road and traYc danger. This fear permeated the school

community and the school’s attitudes and teachings. This is
because the school is sited in a heavily traYcked area and
the children are continually warned and reminded of the
danger that lies outside their school gates. As a result the
children of Mt. Roskill, in particular, recognised the school
as a safe haven, away from the dangers of public space.
Maungawhau Primary students, on the other hand, were
less fearful of traYc and strangers and more concerned
about access to play areas. These children felt the loss of
such areas due to the increased density of their neighbourhood, and the way in which construction impinged on their
ability to explore public space. Complaints about traYc
reducing their quality of life, and about constant parental
surveillance, were common. The Maungawhau children
also desired the closeness of friends because proximity
would result in more play encounters.

6. Conclusion

Our paper’s key contribution has been to see the nuances
of neighbourhoods through children’s eyes. We investigated how children feel about travelling to school and how
they perceive the local public spaces of their neighbourhoods. 
Few studies have investigated primary school-aged
children’s perspectives of home–school journeys, and fewer
still have delved into examining how children would change
their journey if they were able. Our research invited children 
to answer these questions through a mixed methodology 
involving writing activities, photovoice and discussion
groups. Following earlier applications (e.g., Aitken and
Wingate, 1993) we found photovoice to be particularly useful 
in portraying what children perceived as dangerous in
their neighbourhood, while the discussion groups yielded
detailed insights into children’s perceptions of neighbourhood 
space more generally.
The paper sought first to understand how children currently 
travel to school in Auckland City. At our case-study
schools, over half made the journey accompanied by an
adult, and the vast majority of these trips were by private
car. Adult accompaniment was most common within the
most aZuent neighbourhood. Second, we sought to ascertain the ways in which children desire to travel within their
neighbourhoods, and their views on why they are often
unable to realise these desires. We found that over half of
the children who wrote about their travel preferences
wished to change their current mode of transport. Of those
currently being driven, almost half (45%) expressed a desire
for a more active travel mode, with many expressing an
enthusiasm for exploring the local environment. Third, in
response to calls to acknowledge diVerence in children’s
experience, we investigated how children’s perspectives of
their neighbourhoods vary by age, socio-economic status
and school location. Our data showed that, in addition to
well-researched parental fears and restrictions, children’s
own fears limit their use of public space. However there
were clear diVerences across the schools, reXecting local circumstances.
Our Auckland case studies revealed that many children
desire to travel independently within public space but are
constrained in their ability to act on this desire. In the emotional 
geography of neighbourhood in Auckland, the ‘local
sphere’ between home and school appears increasingly
ambiguous: while many children find it appealing, they also
recognise it as a site of risk and uncertainty – in contradistinction 
to the school itself, which they universally imagine
as ‘safe’. This ambiguity did not translate into widespread
enthusiasm for travelling by car: child passengers were generally 
negative about this transport option, complaining of
boredom and the inability to experience their local neighbourhood. 
The children who walked, however, were mostly
positive about their journey, echoing other recent research
in Auckland (Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).
Those participants who expressed a desire for more
active forms of travel oVered reasons that were consistent
with findings previously noted in the children’s geographies 
literature: the desire for social interaction, spatial
exploration and perceived health benefits. However in
contrast to this literature, which focuses on recommendations 
from professionals, our research provided an opportunity 
for children to convey their own opinions about
everyday transportation. Our analysis revealed that children 
recognise many of the reasons for change towards
‘active transport’ advocated by health promoters and
transport planners. This observation was consistent
across the socio-economic levels represented within the
case study schools. However, a range of fears and obstacles 
appear to block children from adopting their desired
modes of travel.
As long as children are seen as ‘innocents’ in need of
protection, they are going to have limited agency in travel
decisions and highly contingent access to public space. This
social construction presents an ongoing challenge to travel
planners and children’s advocates. The challenge is all the
more pressing, given the growing recognition that child
friendly cities are better cities for children and adults (Gleeson 
and Sipe, 2006). Our research has oVered evidence of
children seeking, and in some instances exercising, agency
with respect to their routine mobility. It reveals them to be
actors whose daily lives incorporate active negotiation of
the constraints prevailing within their households and
neighbourhood contexts.
To this extent, our example of school travel illustrates a
pervasive and mundane example of the structure/agency
dynamic and the way that individual and collective action
is invariably constrained, yet holds capacity to be transformative 
(see Dyck and Kearns, 2006). This dynamic is
worked out through parents being the bearers and interpreters 
of two related sets of structural impediments to
children’s independent mobility: anxiety around safety,
much of it media-fuelled, and employment-generated routines 
which mean that adults are driving to work at the
same time as children are making their way to school. Here
we see our work concurring with that of Barker (2003):
rather than being mere passengers, children have the
capacity to contest being driven, and in so doing participate 
in the micro-politics of household life. This agency is
significant in part because of its capacity to map onto
neighbourhoods in terms of activity patterns. While the
discourse of parents protecting their children from strangers 
and traYc by oVering them safety within vehicles
remains socially powerful, this research with children has
revealed an alternative set of voices that value active
travel, outdoor environments, and the ability to navigate
one’s own path to school.