The in<U+FB02>uence of neighborhood environment and household travel
interactions on school travel behavior: an exploration using
geographically-weighted models

abstract
Professional and popular interest in active school transportation (walking and cycling) is matched by an
emerging literature on this topic. This paper explores school travel behavior of 11-year old children in
Toronto, Canada. In particular, the effects of the neighborhood environment and caregiver-child travel
interactions on travel mode choice were studied. Results indicate that the built environment near both
home and school locations was associated with the odds of walking. However, predicted built environment 
effects were less accurate in some neighborhoods. Availability of adults at the time of school travel
likely encouraged driving. School transportation interventions that broadly consider school and neighborhood-oriented 
policies and enable independent mobility may increase walking rates. Presence of spatial 
autocorrelation in the prevalence of walking suggests that more research is required to understand
inter-household similarities in behaviors that are spatially structured.

1. Background                                                                              
											
Western countries have witnessed a major shift in the way                             
children and youth travel to and from school. Following decadal                            
declines in active school transportation (AST: walking or cycling),                        
more students are now being driven than ever before (Buliung                                   
et al., 2009; McDonald, 2007; van der Ploeg et al., 2008). Physical                        
activity derived from school travel may have important implications 
for children’s healthy growth (Active Healthy Kids Canada,                           
2013; TRB, 2005; Tudor-Locke et al., 2001). Hypothetically, those                          
who walk/cycle to school regularly may also appreciate the bene<U+FB01>ts 
of sustainable travel practices and an active lifestyle as they                        
age, while attenuating external costs of automobile use (Black                             
et al., 2001).                                                                             
Quantitatively oriented research has explored the environmental 
and psychological correlates of children’s school travel behavior                      
(e.g., McMillan, 2007; Mitra et al., 2010a; Panter et al., 2010; Yang                      
et al., 2012). Research emphasis on environmental correlates is                            
particularly important in the context of emerging public policy                                
interest in understanding how to plan and engineer built environments 
to enable walking/cycling among children. For example, the                           
Safe Routes to School (SRTS) programs in the U.S. and the School                           
											
Travel Planning (STP) initiatives in Canada emphasize mobilization
of community and government resources with a view to producing
school or site-speci<U+FB01>c social and environmental solutions to the
school travel problem (Buliung et al., 2011; Green Communities
Canada, 2013; NCSRS, 2007).
This study addresses several topics that remain largely unaddressed 
in the current school travel literature. First, household
members’ school transportation mode choice behavior may not
be spatially independent from that of their neighbors; spatial autocorrelation 
in school travel outcomes is expected. Spatial autocorrelation 
may also occur when empirical research fails to capture
fully the variations/similarities in the built environment across
households. The presence of spatial autocorrelation, and a failure
to account for it, may limit our understanding of the relationship
between a household’s travel behavior and the surrounding environment. 
However, spatial autocorrelation remains an under-recognized 
and less discussed issue in the school transportation
literature (Mitra et al., 2010b; Sidharthan et al., 2011).
Second, the school travel outcome is one of many household
activities that are co-located in space and time. The importance
of interactions among household members in explaining household 
travel behavior is widely recognized in the transportation
and geography literatures (Gliebe and Koppelman, 2002; Kang
and Scott, 2011; Srinivasan and Bhat, 2008). For example, caregiver
availability at the time of school travel can be an important aspect
                         
of the mode choice decision process; school travel mode may depend 
on whether a child travels alone, with friends, or is escorted
by an adult or other caregiver (Mitra, 2013). The relationship between 
these intra-household travel interactions and mode choice
for school transportation remains understudied in the current literature 
(McDonald, 2008a; McDonald and Aalborg, 2009; Lin and
Chang, 2010; Vovsha and Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008).
Lastly, the emerging child-youth-friendly planning practice in
Canada (e.g., Metrolinx, 2009; OPPI, 2009) is not supported adequately 
by local knowledge on this topic. Evidence suggests that
planning interventions such as SRTS and STP programs are not necessarily 
universally successful, a point that supports the need to
explore local barriers and enabling social and environmental qualities 
adequately (Buliung et al., 2011). Unfortunately, local evidence 
of the correlates of school travel outcome that can and
should inform policy development in a Canadian context is limited
(Mitra et al., 2010a; Larsen et al., 2012).
This study examines the potential in<U+FB02>uence of the neighborhood 
environment and spatial autocorrelation on walking for
school transportation. It also investigates the effect of the caregiver-child 
travel interactions on travel outcomes. School travel
behavior of 11-year-old children (5th/6th grade) in Toronto, Canada, 
was explored. The research advances current knowledge on
school transportation behavior, and provides local evidence to inform 
current policy in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area
(GTHA), which is Canada’s largest and most populous urban region.
The <U+FB01>ndings also provide an essential comparative link to other
international case studies, one that facilitates testing of our
hypothesis regarding the importance of local knowledge development 
and use in support of local planning.

2. Study design

The study area is the City of Toronto, Canada’s largest city by
population. Toronto has a vibrant and dense central city (i.e., the
downtown surrounded by inner-city neighborhoods). The innercity 
neighborhoods that comprise the pre-politically amalgamated
Toronto1 are typically dominated by medium-density main street
developments (i.e., residential neighborhoods with commercial and
employment-related land uses along the main streets). Many neighborhoods 
in the central city have experienced some re-urbanization
(i.e., increased density and land-use diversity) and re-vitalization
(e.g., improvements in the physical conditions of the buildings)
during the last several decades, a trend that has been accelerated
in recent years by favorable public policy and market conditions.
In contrast, modernist conventional neighborhoods dominate suburban 
areas that were developed after 1945 (i.e., the places that
became part of the city after the political amalgamation in 1998).
The literature on metropolitan growth popularly de<U+FB01>nes this type
of suburban places as the inner-suburbs or inner-ring suburbs within
the larger regional landscape (Lee and Leigh, 2005). These suburban
neighborhoods were designed, for the most part, based on the
neighborhood unit concept with schools at the center (Filion and
Hammond, 2003; Hess, 2009). The inner-city and suburban neighborhoods 
also contain pockets of single-use, high-rise apartment
buildings built between the 1960s and 1980s (i.e. the tower neighborhoods). 
These central-city and suburban places, which have

developed over the past two centuries, represent a large diversity
in built-environment characteristics that are often identi<U+FB01>ed both
in the popular and academic literatures as either enablers or barriers
to active transportation.
Previous research has reported that 49% of 11–13 year-old children 
in Toronto walked or biked to school in 2006; however, AST
uptake has been declining over the past 25 years (Buliung et al.,
2009). In addition, the current rate sits well below the target of
60%, as indicated in the regional transportation plan for the GTHA
(Metrolinx, 2009).

2.1. Data

Travel data were taken from the 2006 Transportation Tomorrow
Survey (TTS), which is a repeat cross-sectional survey of travel
behavior in Southern Ontario, Canada, that includes the City of Toronto. 
The survey has been conducted every <U+FB01>ve years since 1986.
The 2006 version, the latest of the series with available data, includes 
a 5.2% random sample of all households in the study area
(150,000 households in total; 51,612 households in Toronto), and
reports travel behavior data (e.g., origin/destination, trip start time,
purpose, primary travel mode) for a randomly selected weekday in
fall or winter (Data Management Group, 2009). Retrospective data
for all trips by household members aged P11 years, associated
with the day prior to the interview, were proxy reported by an
adult household member.
Home-to-school trips taken between the 06h00–09h30 time
interval, by 11-year-old children (i.e., likely 5th/6th Grade) were
analyzed; data on younger children were not available, and older
children/youth were excluded with an expectation that school
travel behavior may change when children make the transition
to the middle or high school. Only children traveling to public
and Catholic schools were studied,2 these schools accounted for
88% of sampled school trips. The TTS survey collected household socio-demographic 
data, with information on intra-household travel
interactions also available (Table 1). Data were developed from the
survey to examine caregiver availability for escort during the school
travel period. Previous research found an association between
maternal travel patterns and a child’s school travel mode (McDonald,
2008a; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008); father’s and mother’s
travel could not be examined separately here due to the absence
of kinship ties information in the survey data.
Data on the neighborhood built environment came from public
and private sources; these sources are described in Table 1. Built
environment characteristics were measured within a 400-m
straight line buffer distance of each child’s home and school locations, 
a distance that is equivalent to a 5-min walking distance
for a child. This spatial unit of analysis is consistent with what
some other researchers have used to explore school travel behavior
(McMillan, 2007; Mitra et al., 2010a; Schlossberg et al., 2006;
Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008).

2.2. Logit models of mode choice

Multinomial (conditional) logit models (MNL) were estimated
to explore the correlates of four travel modes (walk, transit, school
bus, and car). Other excluded modes constituted less than 1% of all

school trips. Only children living within 3.2 km (2 mi) network                                  
distance from their schools were included in the analysis; preliminary 
analysis of TTS data showed that only 1.6% of all students                                     
walked to school beyond 3.2 km. Adjusting for missing data and                                   
outliers, the <U+FB01>nal dataset included 945 home-to-school trips.                                     
Table 2 provides a description of the sample.                                                     
The neighborhood built environment is assumed here primarily                                 
to in<U+FB02>uence the decision between walking and other modes. Prior                                   
to multivariate logit estimation, the degree of multi-collinearity                                
among built environment variables was examined. When two or                                       
more variables were correlated at r P 0.50 (e.g., MIX_RETAIL and                                  
MIX_OTHERS; BLOCK_DENSITY and FOURWAY_DENSITY), they                                              
were entered into the multivariate models one at a time; the one                                  
having a statistically weaker association (e.g., MIX_OTHERS;                                      
FOURWAY_DENSITY) was excluded from analysis. Individual built                                     
environment variables, measured separately around the residence                                   
and school, were also highly correlated. To overcome this collinearity 
problem, and as previously done in Mitra and Buliung (2012),                                  
separate home and school end models were speci<U+FB01>ed and                                             
estimated.                                                                                        

2.3. Spatial autocorrelation

Spatial autocorrelation occurs when values of an observed outcome, 
sampled at nearby locations, are not independent from each
other (Anselin and Grif<U+FB01>th, 1988; Cliff and Ord, 1970). Within the
context of this study, households living in close proximity may
demonstrate similar mode-choice behavior; i.e., they may engage
in some modeling of one another’s travel practices, compared to
those living farther apart. In addition, statistical model speci<U+FB01>cations 
might not include one or more environmental determinants
of mode choice that are spatially structured (Legendre, 1993). An
exploration of spatial autocorrelation is warranted in order to
understand the geographical limitations of travel behavior analysis,
yet failing to control for spatial effects can produce unreliable
parameter estimates. For policy and practice, spatial autocorrelation 
in travel outcomes may suggest the presence of an unexplored
opportunity for potential intervention(s) that can be implemented
at the neighborhood level. In order to account for spatial autocorrelation 
in the prevalence of walking versus not walking, this study
extends a logit model by including an auto-covariate parameter 

an explanatory variable (Augustin et al., 1996; Dormann et al.,
2007). The auto-covariate variable captures spatial interaction
among the error terms for each student and his/her neighbors
(Dormann et al., 2007). The approach for diagnosing the presence
of spatial effects was as follows: <U+FB01>rst, for each child, the residual
for walk mode was computed by subtracting the predicted mode
choice probability from a dummy indicator of the observed mode
choice (i.e., 1 if a child walked to school, 0 otherwise) (Fosgerau,
2008). Next, a spatial weight matrix was computed, with a maximum 
number of neighbors kmaximum = 20. The weight matrix re<U+FB02>ects 
the conceptualization of a distance-related in<U+FB02>uence
between nearest neighbors on school travel decisions and outcomes. 
An inverse-distance-based conceptualization (i.e., 1d, where
d = network distance between household locations, 63.2 km) was
adopted to generate this spatial weight matrix. A global analysis
of spatial autocorrelation (i.e., global Moran’s I) using this matrix
produced statistically signi<U+FB01>cant (p < 0.01) results, indicating the
presence of spatial dependency among the residuals.
The auto-covariate parameter for an individual student i was
then calculated as a weighted average of the residual values from
the nearest neighbors of i’s home location (Augustin et al., 1996):

where ej is the value of the residual for jth neighbor among i’s set of
ki (620) neighbors; wij is the spatial weight of jth neighbor over i,
obtained from the spatial weight matrix formulated earlier. Two
such parameters were calculated for each child (home and schoolend). 
The resulting AUTO_COV variables were then used in the multivariate 
analysis. A statistically signi<U+FB01>cant AUTO_COV coef<U+FB01>cient
represents the un-confounded (i.e., adjusted) correlation between
walk mode choice and any unobservable effects that are spatially
structured. The intention of this research was to investigate, in an
exploratory manner, the potential in<U+FB02>uence of spatial autocorrelation 
on school travel mode-choice behavior. The proposed method
begins to improve our current understanding on this subject, within
a context where there is no widely acknowledged method for this
purpose (Dormann et al., 2007; Sidharthan et al., 2011).

3. Results and discussion

Mode-choice behavior was analyzed for the journey to school of
children who lived within 3.2 km of their schools. The convergence
of the models was satisfactory. Distance was the most important
factor that explained mode choice for school transportation, followed 
by variables related to intra-household travel interactions
(Table 3). Environmental characteristics, collectively, had a relatively 
smaller impact on model <U+FB01>t. The built environment correlates 
of school travel modes are introduced <U+FB01>rst here, followed
by intra-household travel interaction-related <U+FB01>ndings, and then
other in<U+FB02>uences.

3.1. The built environment

Distance between home and school locations remained an
important factor after controlling for other variables, con<U+FB01>rming
<U+FB01>ndings from past research (Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald,
2008b; Schlossberg et al., 2006) (Table 4). The distance effect supports 
the case for smaller neighborhood schools, particularly in a
dense urban area such as Toronto, as a means to increase AST rates
(McDonald, 2008b; Mitra et al., 2010a). Beyond distance, built
environment near both home and school locations, and the characteristics 
of the travel route, were also associated with walking. A
neighborhood environment that is expected to provide a sense of
personal and traf<U+FB01>c safety, such as no major streets en-route to
school, and higher land-use mix (i.e., more retail/service related
land use and, hence, more ‘‘eyes on street’’), increased the odds
of walking. These results are comparable to other studies (McMillan, 
2007; Panter et al., 2010). Home and school neighborhoods

with smaller blocks, which largely represent (at least conceptually)
urban, safe, attractive, and walkable neighborhoods, also increased
the likelihood of walking.
Similar to previous research (Panter et al., 2010; Timperio et al.,
2006), a positive association was observed between the potential
indirectness of school travel route and walking. This <U+FB01>nding suggests 
that although direct travel routes are expected to encourage
walking among adults (Ewing and Cervero, 2010), a different reality 
may exist for children. Closer scrutiny of the home and school
locations (using a current digital orthophoto map of Toronto) revealed 
that students with low INDIRECT scores largely lived on major 
streets, and their schools were also located on major streets.
The model result, then, was not surprising. Perhaps perceived risks
related to traf<U+FB01>c safety (which would discourage walking) outweigh 
perceived connectivity (which would encourage walking)
due to the directness of a school travel route. Some children may
also enjoy taking quieter and more indirect routes through the
neighborhoods, where students can contemplate or walk together
with other children (Buliung et al., 2013; Fusco et al., 2012).
A propensity map was generated to explore the geography of
built environment effects (Yoon et al., 2011). To estimate a child’s
propensity to walk due to the built environment near the home
location, the values of each statistically signi<U+FB01>cant variable were
<U+FB01>rst standardized (i.e., the difference from the mean for INDIRECT
and BLOCK_DENSITY; 0 or 1 for NO_STREETCROSS and MIX_RE-
TAIL), and then were multiplied by the estimated coef<U+FB01>cient (bi)
value for that variable. Due to con<U+FB01>dentiality reasons, Fig. 1

displays students’ home locations at the residential block level.
In cases where multiple students lived within the same block,
the mean (INDIRECT, BLOCK_DENSITY) or the maximum
(NO_STREETCROSS, MIX_RETAIL) propensity values for all students
within a block were used. The four individual propensities were
then summed to obtain an estimated cumulative propensity to
walk for each child. In Fig. 1, then, a block with a positive value
(>0) identi<U+FB01>es a residential location within the City of Toronto
where the built environment (as measured here) was positively
associated with walking. Similarly, propensity <0 demonstrates a
negative correlation.
The data indicate that the built environment prevalent within
the central city (i.e., downtown Toronto and the inner-city neighborhoods) 
was largely associated with walking. Within neighborhoods 
at suburban locations, the effect of the built environment
remained mixed. Further qualitative inspection of orthophotography 
revealed noticeable variation in urban design characteristics
across Toronto’s suburban neighborhoods. The propensity map
suggests that a suburban place that possesses design qualities
associated with walking may produce walking school trips, despite
its suburban locale. Several examples of the relationship between
neighborhood built environment and walking are presented
(Fig. 1: inserts 1–4).
Some differences between the modeled and actual mode-choice
outcome were observed, which is not surprising in the context of a
moderate model <U+FB01>t (adjusted q2 = 0.312) (Table 3). However, the
objectively measured built environment characteristics were

particularly weak in predicting the travel behavior of students
who, for instance, lived within the tower-neighborhoods that are
commonly found in suburban Toronto. Insert 4 in Fig. 1 demonstrates 
an example. The Tower Neighborhoods were largely built
during the 1960–80 period; and there are approximately 1200
apartment towers in the City of Toronto, which represent 48% of
the city’s rental housing stock. These towers were built as a result
of urban policies that encouraged the ‘‘tower in the park’’ housing
model: high-density apartment clusters in the newer suburban
neighborhoods (E.R.A., 2010). The towers are often clustered together 
within one or more super-blocks, forming neighborhoods
of their own (hence, the tower neighborhoods).
The poor match between modeled walking propensity and the
actual travel outcome in these tower neighborhoods points to a
broader problem related to the use of objectively measured built
environment characteristics in understanding mode choice behavior. 
Empirical research in urban planning tends to measure neighborhood 
design qualities in terms of a combination of individual
characteristics such as grid versus curvilinear streets, mixed versus
segregated land use, and small versus large blocks. The range of
these measures is usually set by traditional central-city (e.g., grid
streets, mixed land use, small blocks) and conventional suburban
(e.g., curvilinear streets, segregated land use, large blocks) neighborhoods. 
The qualities of other neighborhoods are determined
based on where they <U+FB01>t along this continuum. This approach was

applied in this study, and the built environment measures relatively 
accurately predicted walking mode choice for typical central-city 
or suburban neighborhood types. However, the results
were less accurate at the intersection of neighborhoods that, as a
whole, did not <U+FB01>t well to the abovementioned ‘‘typical’’ measures
of design qualities, but are rather common neighborhood types
in the context of a large North American city (e.g., the tower/apartment-neighborhoods). 
In Toronto, the average household income
in most tower-neighborhoods is low. Thus, socio-economic factors
may dictate walking in a less-than-ideal environment (Hess and
Farrow, 2010). However, it is possible that these neighborhoods
are indeed walkable due to their social (e.g., everyone walks) and
physical (e.g., informal pathways) settings, even though some design 
elements (larger blocks, auto-oriented street design, lack of
land-use mix) are assumed, by convention, to discourage walking.
In addition to neighborhood characteristics, the auto-covariate
parameter was positively associated with walking. While the exact
qualities driving this spatial dependency could not be identi<U+FB01>ed
conclusively in this research, the result warrants some informed
speculation with regard to meaning. First, this study examined
several neighborhood characteristics, but there may be other
important characteristics (objective or perceived) that remain
unexplored, that speaks to one of the root causes underlying the
presence of spatial dependence. The auto-covariate parameter estimate 
may describe spatial variation in travel outcome related to

these potentially unexplored characteristics. Second, the
AUTO_COV coef<U+FB01>cient may capture any form of social norm/modeling 
behavior around travel mode that operates at the local neighborhood 
level and is adopted by the households living in a
neighborhood. Lastly, household mode-choice behavior can also
be in<U+FB02>uenced by household attitudes toward travel or the built
environment (Boarnet and Crane, 2001; Cao et al., 2009; Kitamura
et al., 1997; Yang et al., 2012). A household may choose to live in a
walkable or a drivable neighborhood based on its choice or preference 
(commonly known as ‘‘self-selection’’ in urban planning literature). 
Collectively, then, similar school-travel outcomes within
close proximity may re<U+FB02>ect common household attitudes about
housing, amenities, and transport. The potential relationship between 
neighborhood self-selection, transport norms, and AST has
yet to be addressed systematically in the literature.

3.2. Intra-household travel interactions

An association was found between a child’s school travel mode
and the travel characteristics of other household members (Table 4),
which is broadly similar to what has been reported in limited 
previous research (McDonald, 2008a; McDonald and Aalborg,
2009; Lin and Chang, 2010; Vovsha and Petersen, 2005; Yarlagadda
and Srinivasan, 2008). In particular, our <U+FB01>ndings support the
‘‘availability’’ hypothesis discussed earlier in this paper, and indicate 
that when an adult caregiver was available at home at the
time of school travel, a child was more likely to be escorted to
school, increasing the odds of a car trip. In contrast, the absence
of an adult caregiver, and hence the possibility of independent
mobility (i.e., travel without an accompanying adult caregiver), increased 
the likelihood of walking, taking transit, or riding a school
bus. Additionally, in a household with two or more children traveling to school, 
the odds of taking a non-auto mode was higher, compared 
to a single-child household. Perhaps, in many households
where multiple children are aged P 11 years, the children accompany 
each other instead of being escorted by adults. In addition, car
trips were more common among children from auto-dependent
households (Table 4). This observation is not surprising in the context 
of evidence suggesting that, given a <U+FB01>xed number of daily
household activities, dependency on one travel mode (in this case,
private automobile) for some daily activities (e.g., work) may discourage 
the use of other modes of travel to other destinations
(e.g., school) (Cervero and Radisch, 1996).

3.3. Other potential in<U+FB02>uences

A household’s access to private automobiles increased the odds
of a car trip (Table 4). By contrast, access to transit was not associated 
with transit mode choice. Also at the age of 11 years, there
was no difference in walking between boys and girls, a result that
is similar to what has been reported in some recent studies
(Johansson et al., 2012; McDonald, 2012; Mitra and Buliung,
2012). Children going to Catholic schools were more likely to take
a school bus compared to those going to public schools. Seasonality
(WINTER) was not associated with mode choice of these elementary 
school children, which con<U+FB01>rms the <U+FB01>ndings from previous
research (Mitra and Faulkner, 2012; Sirard et al., 2005).

4. Implications for policy and practice

In the U.S., the Federal government has devoted $862 million
since 2005 to the implementation of Safe Routes to School (SRTS)
programs (NCSRS, 2010). This centralized (Federal) funding model
to school transportation planning is not the norm in Canada,
re<U+FB02>ecting a long-standing, piecemeal, often highly politicized
approach to Federal investment in transportation infrastructure
and services in urban Canada. In 2007, a community-based organization, 
Green Communities Canada, began implementing a pilot
School Travel Planning (STP) framework across Canada, with <U+FB01>nancial 
support from the Public Health Agency of Canada (Buliung
et al., 2011; Green Communities Canada, 2013). Key community
stakeholders (school boards, urban/transportation planners, public
health professionals, police, parents, students and teachers) collaborate 
to identify barriers to active transportation for a school, and
develop an action plan to address and overcome those barriers. An
STP may include the implementation of transportation infrastructure 
(e.g., pedestrian crossings, bike-racks), educational programs
(e.g., safety of pedestrians and cyclists), community mobilization
programs (e.g., walking school bus), and encouragement programs
(e.g., event days) (Green Communities Canada, 2013).
From 2009 to 2011, the provincial transportation authority for
the GTHA, the Metrolinx (2011), partnered with Green Communities 
Canada in implementing the ‘‘Stepping it Up’’ initiative, which
introduced the STP model to 30 grade schools across the region.
This pilot program received funding from Transport Canada. Since
2011, no longer-term revenue stream has been identi<U+FB01>ed. However, 
Metrolinx continues to support walking, cycling, and transit
use for school transportation through community mobilization.
Within this context, a better understanding of the correlates of
school travel mode choice can be important in identifying locational 
foci for school and community-level interventions, with a
view to optimizing expenditure from limited program resources.
Findings from this study may inform development of speci<U+FB01>c interventions 
within the broader scope of STP initiatives. At the municipality 
level, the planning and design of the neighborhoods and
school policy may also play potentially important roles in enabling
AST among children. The main lessons from this work are:

4.1. The built environment near both home and school locations is
important

Canadian STP initiatives emphasize changes to the built environment 
at and near schools. Results from this study indicated that
environmental interventions may increase walking school trips,
but these interventions could be effective if implemented at the
home and/or school end. In other words, considerations for AST
should be incorporated in the neighborhood planning practice,
above and beyond the STP exercise. Neighborhoods with smaller
blocks, higher land-use mix (retail and residential), and more local
streets increased the odds of walking in Toronto. Some other transportation 
infrastructures (e.g., density of intersections with signallights, 
dead-end streets) were not correlated with walking.

4.2. Expectation regarding design-based interventions should be
modest

The design concerns explored in this study, however, only
explained part of the spatial variation in school travel mode choice
outcomes in Toronto, similar to what has been observed in other
places. Expectations regarding the success of a design-based
intervention, therefore, should be modest. In addition, results from
this research indicate that city-wide modeling of travel behavior,
and planning practice based on those model results, may perform
poorly with regard to understanding and changing mode-choice
outcomes within places that are poorly matched to the conventional 
design perspectives concerning ‘‘walkable’’ and ‘‘nonwalkable’’ 
neighborhoods. Initiatives such as STP should give
particular importance to exploring environment-travel interactions 
within neighborhoods that do not conform to design-place
stereotypes (e.g., tower-neighborhoods in the suburbs).

4.3. Promoting independent travel may increase the rates of walking

Current research has demonstrated that children’s independent
mobility, or freedom to explore their neighbourhood unsupervised,
has important implications for their physical, social, and psychological 
development (Carver et al., 2008; Prezza and Pacilli, 2007;
Tranter and Whitelegg, 1994). The importance of independent
mobility is beginning to be recognized in Canada (Active Healthy
Kids Canada, 2013). Independent mobility, at least conceptually,
can also be linked to AST (Mitra, 2013). Obviously, when children
are traveling independently, they are likely not being driven. The
results from this study support this hypothesis by suggesting indirectly 
that children who were escorted by adult caregivers were
more likely to be driven to school. It appears that programs that
encourage independent or autonomous traveling to school (i.e.,
not accompanied by adult caregivers) could potentially enable
AST. For example, community mobilization that encourages school
travel without direct adult supervision while ensuring adult presence 
(e.g., walking school bus) may increase rates of walking in
Toronto. These community initiatives may particularly target
stay-home (or part-time working) caregivers who usually accompany 
their children during school travel, and encourage them to
lead walking groups, act as volunteers, or even as crossing guards.

4.4. School policy has a potentially important role in the promotion of
AST

A limited existing research has documented an association between 
school types and walking. For example, children attending
choice schools (i.e., public schools where attendance is not tied
to the neighborhood of residence) are more likely to be driven
compared to neighborhood public schools, largely because of the
differences in typical travel distance and parental attitudes toward
a child’s mobility (Yang et al., 2012). In the context of Toronto, it
appears that the governance of school transport may indeed have
a major role in moderating mode choice at the individual level.
Students attending Catholic schools were more likely to travel by
school bus, compared to students in public schools, perhaps due
to the <U+FB02>exible school transportation policy of the Catholic school
board. While Toronto’s public schools apply a strictly implemented
distance threshold to limit service eligibility, Catholic schools are
more <U+FB02>exible in applying their distance policy for busing. Transportation 
is often provided to students living less than 1.5 km from
school, arguably to encourage students to attend Catholic neighborhood 
schools with dwindling attendance.

5. Limitations

This research draws attention to some broader limitations of an
empirical investigation in understanding the relationship between
the built environment and travel behavior. First, some spatial
variation in mode-choice behavior was correlated with unobservable 
characteristics likely shared among neighboring households.
Further research focused on localized variation in perceptions,
attitudes, and social norms around transportation decisions is
likely to be a useful direction for additional study. Second, the built
environment correlates were less accurate for the neighborhoods
that generally did not <U+FB01>t well with the ‘‘typical’’ qualities of a traditional 
central-city or a conventional suburban neighborhood. In
addition, with regard to the observable built environment characteristics, 
previous research has reported mixed results regarding
the association between sidewalks and the odds of walking (Ewing
et al., 2004; McMillan, 2007). However, most streets in Toronto
have sidewalks. Conceptually, then, sidewalks may not be an
important factor that explains the difference in walking rates

across space within the Toronto metropolitan area. At the time of
analysis, data on informal footpaths, shortcuts, or pathways (i.e.,
those that are not formally planned or managed by the city) were
also not available. Conceivably, such informal infrastructures
would offer opportunities for active travel for children in any
neighborhood (Buliung et al., 2013; Fusco et al., 2012). In the context 
of our study, informal shortcuts or pathways may, at least
partly, explain unexpected walking rates in some inner-suburban
neighborhoods in Toronto, as discussed in Section 3.1. A closer
examination of this topic remains subject to future research.
Findings from this research also begin to provide insights into
the relationship between travel negotiations among household
members and school travel-mode choice. However, the behavioral
processes that determine or moderate such negotiations could not
be fully investigated here. Broader behavioral understandings may
emerge through further quantitative and qualitative exploration of
school travel within the context of a household’s activity-travel demands 
and constraints.

6. Conclusion

This study adopted a geographically weighted modeling
approach to investigate school travel-mode choice in Toronto,
Canada’s largest city by population. Quantitative models were estimated 
using data from a large and population-representative
transportation survey. First, with regard to the neighborhood environment, 
our results indicate that built environment characteristics 
related to safety and neighborhood aesthetics/walkability
explained mode choice, even when travel distance was controlled.
Second, with regard to the intra-household travel interactions, the
results suggest that the availability of caregivers at the time of
school travel, which perhaps facilitated escorted school trips, was
associated with driving. The presence of siblings aged P 11 years,
on the contrary, was associated with walking and the use of transit.
Lastly, with regard to the universality of the enablers and barriers
to AST, our results related to the neighborhood environment were
largely similar to what has been reported previously. However,
these <U+FB01>ndings were not generalizable to all neighborhoods within
Toronto. The predicted built environment effects were more accurate 
in some types of neighborhood, but relatively less accurate in
some other types of neighborhoods, a <U+FB01>nding that emphasizes the
importance of exploring environment-AST interactions at the local
level. In addition, students going to Catholic schools were more
likely to take a school bus compared to students in public schools,
perhaps re<U+FB02>ecting the less spatially rigid busing strategy of Toronto’s 
Catholic school board.
Our <U+FB01>ndings improve current knowledge on the correlates of
AST, challenge the assumptions around the generalizability of observed 
built environment effects across all neighborhood types,
and provide local evidence that may inform school transportation
planning practice, such as the STP initiative, in Canada. The study
also advances school transportation research by addressing the
spatial autocorrelation problem in a quantitative investigation of
school travel behavior. There are potential bene<U+FB01>ts in extending
the proposed conceptual and methodological approach in the
exploration of school travel, childhood mobility, and physical
activity. An improved knowledge of these potentially modi<U+FB01>able
human behaviors could bene<U+FB01>t policy that is focused on healthy
and sustainable urban communities.