Do parental perceptions of the                                              
neighbourhood environment                                                   
influence children’s independent
mobility? Evidence from Toronto,
Canada

Children’s independent mobility (CIM), or a child’s freedom to explore their neighbourhood unsupervised, 
is important for their psychological development and potentially enables daily physical
activity. However, the correlates of CIM remain under-studied particularly in terms of the influence
of the neighbourhood environment. Within this context, children’s independent mobility in
Toronto, Canada, was examined using linear regression and ordered logit models. Findings demonstrate 
that a higher level of CIM was correlated with more physical activity. Parental perceptions
related to neighbourhood safety, stranger danger and sociability were associated with CIM. A child’s
independent mobility was also correlated with age, sex, language spoken at home and parental
travel attitudes. Interventions to increase CIM should focus on enhancing the neighbourhood social
environment. Increasing the independent mobility of girls and of children with diverse ethno-cultural
backgrounds are also worthy of particular research and policy attention.

Background                                       
							
Children’s independent mobility (CIM) has					
been defined as a child’s freedom to travel	
around their own neighbourhood or to public	
places without adult supervision (Hillman et	
al., 1990; Schoeppe et al., 2013; Tranter and	
Whitelegg, 1994). Previous research has	
recognised the importance of independent	
mobility for a child’s psychological development 
and welfare. For example, CIM may	
improve a child’s spatial, motor and analytical 
skills (Davis and Jones, 1996; Rissotto	
and Giuliani, 2006) and social development	
(Prezza et al., 2001). Children who travel and	
play on their own may also demonstrate	
greater knowledge about their neigbourhoods	
and a more sophisticated sense of community	
compared with those who are less independent 
(Gold and Goodey, 1989; Horelli, 2001;	
Prezza and Pacilli, 2007). A greater sense of	
community, in turn, may relate to higher	
sociability and the attenuation of safety concerns 
(Prezza and Pacilli, 2007).		
More recently, CIM has received attention		
because of its potential link to physical activity. 
The majority of North American children
do not meet current physical activity guidelines 
of at least 60 minutes of moderate to
vigorous physical activity (MVPA) every day
of the week (Stone et al., 2013; Troiano et al.,				
2008). Within this context, an emphasis on
CIM is important, because increased freedom      
with regard to mobility may offer increased      
opportunities for active travel (conceivably, a  
child who is travelling independently would      
walk, cycle or use transit for transportation)   
and unsupervised play (Page et al., 2010),       
and contribute to a child’s accumulation of      
physical activity (Carver et al., 2008;          
Faulkner et al., 2009). Few studies have         
reported positive association between CIM        
and physical activity levels (Mackett et al.,    
2007; Page et al., 2009; Schoeppe et al.,        
2013). This existing research is largely situated 
within Europe, less research has been       

2012; Alparone et al., 2003; Johansson,
2003). Adults tend to permit boys greater
independent mobility than girls (Brown et
al., 2008; Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Hillman
et al., 1990; Page et al., 2009). Household
auto ownership is largely uncorrelated with
CIM (Hillman et al., 1990; Johansson,
2006). In addition, parental mobility experiences 
during childhood (Prezza and Pacilli,
2007), and social norms around parental
control or responsibility over a child
(Tranter and Whitelegg, 1994), may influence 
CIM. Parental perception of the potential
benefits of a child’s autonomy may also
increae the likelihood of CIM (Alparone and
Pacilli, 2012; O’Brien et al., 2000). Lastly,
cultural factors are potentially important
correlates of CIM; cross-cultural differences
in CIM have been documented in previous
studies (Hillman et al., 1990; Malone and
Rudner, 2011; Shaw et al., 2013; Tranter and
Whitelegg, 1994).
With regard to transportation preferences
and attitudes, previous research has reported
parental perception of convenience and
time-savings as two major motivations for
escorted (i.e. accompanied by adult caregivers) 
school trips (Faulkner et al., 2010;
McDonald and Aalborg, 2009). In addition,
a parent’s attitude toward a child’s transportation 
mode (e.g. a child should be driven in
a car) may influence escorted versus independent 
travel (Johansson, 2006). Researchers
have also hypothesised an association
between a household’s mobility lifestyle, in
particular, the overall attitude toward transportation 
modes for household travel, and
CIM (Fotel and Thomsen, 2004; Tranter
and Whitelegg, 1994). However, the correlation 
between these household travel attitudes
and CIM has not been empirically examined
to date.
An emerging literature, largely set in
Europe and Australia, has examined the
environmental influences on CIM. The current 
research indicates some associations

between neighbourhood built environment
and CIM, although findings are sometimes
at odds across studies. For example,
Broberg et al. (2013) reported higher levels
of CIM both in densely built up residential
areas and in remote places. In contrast,
other researchers have reported lower levels
of CIM in large urban areas compared with
small urban/rural areas (Jones et al., 2000;
Kytta¨, 2002). European case studies have
reported that residential development with a
courtyard setting likely encourages CIM,
since courtyards offer a centralised place for
parents to observe children engaged in independent 
play at ‘arms length’ (Prezza et al.,
2001). In addition, parks or green spaces
close to home likely increase opportunities
for creative play and social interaction, and
improve parental perceptions around a
child’s capability related to CIM (Alparone
and Pacilli, 2012; Prezza et al., 2005). Some
researchers have found the presence of play
areas to be important determinants of CIM
(Gaster, 1991). High number of transit stops
and access to retail and recreational facilities
may also be the markers of an enabling setting 
for CIM (Broberg et al., 2013;
Villanueva et al., 2012). Lin and Chang
(2010) explored independent mobility for
school transportation in Taipei, Taiwan.
Their results indicated some correlations
between high sidewalk coverage, high building 
density, smaller street blocks, narrow
streets, street trees and independent school
travel (Lin and Chang, 2010).
Lastly, perceptions of the neighbourhood
built and social environments (particularly
parental perception) have long been
hypothesised to have a major influence on
CIM (Alparone and Pacilli, 2012; Fotel and
Thomsen, 2004; Hillman et al., 1990;
Tranter and Whitelegg, 1994). Empirical evidence 
of such a relationship, however, is relatively 
limited. Previous research has
indicated some associations between perceived 
traffic danger and CIM (Fyhri et al.,

2011; Johansson, 2006; Villanueva et al.,
2012). Parents’ and a child’s perception of a
neighbourhood’s social environment (e.g.
friendliness of neighbours, fear of a child
witnessing a crime and coming in contact
with drugs) is also likely important
(Alparone and Pacilli, 2012; Jones et al.,
2000; Villanueva et al., 2012; Zwerts et al.,
2010). Results related to parental perception
of a child’s personal safety/stranger danger
and CIM remain mixed. While some studies
have indicated a relationship between perceived 
social danger/stranger danger and
CIM (Alparone and Pacilli, 2012), other
quantitative studies have found no such
association (Johansson, 2006; Villanueva et
al., 2012).

Research questions
While there exists an emerging body of
research examining the correlates of CIM,
gaps remain, particularly in terms of the role
of the neighbourhood environment and parental 
attitudes toward travel. In addition,
the North American context remains understudied. 
This paper focuses on children’s
mobility behaviour in the City of Toronto,
Canada, which is the largest city in Canada
and fourth largest in North America with a
population of 2.6 million (Statistics Canada,
2012). Informed by previous research on
children’s travel behaviour (e.g. Mitra, 2013;
Panter et al., 2008), a social-ecological
approach was adopted to explore CIM. We
hypothesised multiple levels of influence on
CIM, which may include the demographic
characteristics of a child, socio-economic
characteristics     of     the      household,
transportation-related preferences and attitudes, 
and the neighbourhood environmental 
qualities (in this context, subjective
perceptions of parents). In particular, three
research questions with regard to CIM were
examined: (1) Is independent mobility associated 
with children’s physical activity levels?

(2) Do parental perceptions of the neighbourhood 
environment influence CIM? and
(3) What role do parents’ mobility-related
attitudes have in influencing CIM?
The paper provides a North American
account of the importance, prevalence and the
correlates of CIM. This information is necessary 
to assess, once coupled with findings
from the international literature, the presence
of any unversally compelling evidence regarding 
the benefits and correlates of CIM, and
more crucially, to inform Canadian and
North American policies and interventions
that may be designed to increase CIM.

Study design
The study is set in Toronto, Canada.
Emphasis is given to the relationship between
CIM and a child’s age and sex, household’s
socio-economic characteristics, travel attitudes 
and parental perceptions of neighbourhood 
environmental qualities. We hypothesise
that the adult caregivers are the primary decision 
makers, for the age group studied here,
regarding a child’s travel and out-of-home
activity participation (McMillan, 2005; Mitra,
2013). As such, parental travel attitudes and
perceptions of neighbourhood environment
were explored. However, we do acknowledge
that children may have some agency in affecting 
their mobility outcomes (Faulkner et al.,
2010; McMillan, 2005; Mitra, 2013) or
informing       parental   attitudes    and/or
perceptions.

Survey
The data were collected in the City of
Toronto between April 2010 and June 2011,
as part of Project BEAT (Built Environment
and Active Transport; www.beat.utoron-
to.ca). All elementary/intermediate schools
within the Toronto District School Board
(TDSB) with Grade 5 and 6 students (n =
469) received an invitation to participate. Of

all schools that expressed an interest in participating, 
16 were systematically selected based
on their urban locations and neighbourhood
incomes. With respect to urban location, half
of the schools (n = 8) were located in older
inner-urban neighbourhoods, the other half (n
= 8) were located in newer inner-suburban
neighbourhoods. In Toronto, the inner-urban
neighbourhoods are typically characterised by
connected (often gridded) street layout,
shorter straight neighbourhood blocks, mixed
land use and pedestrian-oriented design. In
contrast, the inner-suburban neighbourhoods
were typically built after World War II, and
can be characterised by curvilinear street layouts, 
clear street hierarchy, larger blocks, segregated 
land use and automobile oriented
design (Hess, 2009; Mitra and Buliung, 2012;
Sewell, 1993). In general, then, these selected
neighbourhoods represent both traditional
and planned suburban neighbourhood types.
However, the built and social environments
vary     considerably      across    these     16
neighbourhoods.
With respect to neighbourhood income,
four inner-urban and four inner-suburban
schools were located in low-income neighbourhoods. 
A low-income school was identified 
based on the Dissemination Area (DA;
the smallest geographical unit for which census 
data is collected by Statistics Canada)
level median household incomes within
800m straight line distance of the school
(Statistics Canada, 2008). Of all TDSB
schools, the ones with lower 50th percentile
median household incomes were classified as
low-income schools. The other eight schools
were located in high-income (. 50th percentile 
income) neighbourhoods.
A total of 1027 parents (i.e. adult caregivers) 
of children attending grades 5 and 6
gave consent for their children to participate
in the study. Both children and their parents
took part in a take-home questionnaire survey. 
In this study, only data from the parental 
survey were analysed. Parents answered

structured questions related to the child
who brought the survey home. Children’s
physical activity data was collected using
accelerometry (ActiGraphÓ GT1M) for a
seven-day period (see Stone et al., 2013 for
further detail of the accelerometry protocol).
A 5 second epoch was used to capture rapid
transitions in activity typical in children
(Stone et al., 2009a, 2013). Physical activity
levels are reported only for those children
who recorded accelerometry data for at least
three weekdays and one weekend day during
the data collection period. Among the 1027
participants, 795 (77.4%) parents completed
all the questions relevant for this study.
Valid accelerometry data (i.e. at least three
weekdays and one weekend day) were available 
for fewer students (n = 686; 66.8%).

Independent mobility

A child’s independent mobility was measured 
using information from the parental
survey. Parents were asked the following
question regarding their child’s independent
mobility:

In general, how often do you allow your child

(who gave you this survey) to go out on their
own or with friends (without an adult)?

They reported their responses on a fourpoint 
ordinal scale: 1 = never; 2 = sometimes
; 3 = often; and 4 = always. However,
only 2.6% of parents (n = 21) indicated that
their children were always allowed to go out
by themselves. As a result, parental
responses were collapsed into three ‘never’ 
(survey response = 1), ‘sometimes’ 
(survey response = 2) and ‘often or
always’ (survey response = 3 or 4) for the
analysis presented in this study.

Physical activity
Child-specific published thresholds of
ActiGraph count data were used for the

classification of activity intensity levels
(Stone et al., 2009b). Average daily minutes
of accumulated moderate to vigorous physical 
activity (MVPA), obtained from the
accelorometry data using a threshold of .
3580 counts/min, was calculated for each
child and used as the objectively measured
physical activity outcome in this research.

Child’s demographic characteristics
Each parent reported the age and sex (boy
or girl) of the child who brought the survey
home.

Socio-economic characteristics

The parental survey included questions on
socio-economic characteristics of the household. 
Parents reported the number of adult
household members (i.e. college age or
above) who worked/studied full time,
worked/studied part time or had no paid
employment. Using these data, a dummy
variable ‘ 1 household adults work/study
part time or are home makers’ (versus all
adults work/study full time) was created.
Parents also reported the duration of their
stay in the current residence; the data was
converted into a dummy variable (10 years
or more versus up to 9 years) for multivariate 
analysis. Language that is commonly
spoken at home (if English was not the only
language) was also reported. The responses
were classified into three categories: English

or French (i.e. the two national languages in
Canada, used as reference), Language spoken 
in Asian countries (e.g. Arabic, Bengali,
Mandarin, Tamil), and Language spoken in
other countries (e.g. Albanian, Mandinka,
Spanish) (Table 1).
Most parents did not offer household
income data. As a result, it was necessary to
use area-level household income data to
evaluate how CIM might systematically vary
by areas differentiated according to household 
income. This was achieved using the
Urban Studies 51(16)
DA-level household income data from the
2006 population census (Statistics Canada,
2008). A child’s residential neighbourhood
was identified as a low-income neighbourhood 
when the median of all DA-level median 
household incomes within a 800 m
straight line radius of the home location was
less than the 50th percentile (DA-level) median 
income for the City of Toronto (i.e. \
CAD 59,972).

Parental attitudes toward transportation
modes
The parental survey asked respondents if
they agreed or disagreed with a series of 22
statements related to their attitudes toward
travelling and transportation mode choice.
Six of these statements were relevant to parental 
attitude and preference toward household 
travel (other statements were specific to
school transportation), and were analysed in
this study (Table 1). For each statement,
parents reported their responses on a 5-point
Likert scale ranging from ‘Strongly Agree’
(1) to ‘Strongly Disagree’ (5). An exploratory 
principal component analysis of these
six variables, using promax rotation with
Kaiser normalisation, identified two factors
related to travel preferences across 795 parents, 
which were labelled as ‘Car lovers’ and
‘Active travellers’ (Table 2). Two new variables 
were created using the factor loadings,
and were explored in the multivariate
analysis.

Perceptions of neighbourhood environment
Neighbourhood environment was assessed by
exploring 11 statements that reflected parental 
perceptions of the social and built environments 
near a child’s residential location
(Table 1). Parents reported their observations
on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from
‘Strongly Agree’ (1) to ‘Strongly Disagree’
(5). A principal component analysis failed to
identify meaningful factors. As a result, each

statement was explored as an individual variable. 
Two of these statements, ‘There is heavy                 
traffic near my home’ and ‘Most drivers go                     
too fast while driving in my neighbourhood’,                   
were correlated (Spearman’s rank-order correlation 
coefficient, r = 0.48). Our preliminary 
analysis suggested that one of these two                 

variables, ‘Most drivers go too fast while
driving in my neighbourhood’, had a higher
impact on the model fit, relative to the other.
As a result, this variable was included in the
multivariate analysis. The final model specification 
included ten neighbourhood environment 
variables. Similar to what has been

done in previous studies (Panter et al., 2010;
Timperio et al., 2006), the responses were collapsed 
into two groups – ‘Agree’ (1 or 2 on
the 5-point scale) and ‘Neither or disagree’ (3
to 5 on the 5-point scale; used as reference),
for multivariate analysis.

Statistical analysis

A linear regression approach was applied to
examine the correlation between CIM and
physical activity level. CIM (independent
variable) was expressed as a categorical variable 
with three potential outcomes – ‘never’,
‘sometimes’ and ‘often or always’; the ‘never’
category was used as the reference. The
physical activity level (dependent variable)
was expressed in terms of accelerometermeasured MVPA.

Ordered logit models (also known as the
proportional odds model) were specified and
estimated to explore the correlates of CIM,
using NLOGIT 5 (ÓEconometric Software,
Inc.). In these models, a child’s CIM (i.e. the
dependent variable in the models) was measured 
using a three-point ordinal scale (‘never’
versus ‘sometimes’ versus ‘often or always’).
A total of two parental travel attitudes
(obtained from principal component analysis)
and ten environmental perception measures
were examined as potential correlates.
The ordered logit modelling approach is
different from the more commonly used

binomial logistic regression approach (e.g.
Broberg et al., 2013; Villanueva et al., 2012),
and in this case, allowed an examination of
multiple ‘levels’ of CIM reported on an ordinal 
scale. In an ordered logit model, the relationship 
between each pair of independent
mobility outcomes (i.e. ‘never’ versus ‘sometimes’; 
‘sometimes’ versus ‘often or always’)
is assumed to be the same (Greene, 2007). A
coefficient (b      ^ i ) from a multivariate model
represents the log odds of being in a higher
level with regard to CIM, given that all of
the other variables in the model are held
constant. A proportional Odds Ratio (OR,
i.e. exp b  ^ i ), then, represents the adjusted correlation 
between a variable and the odds of
a attaining higher levels of CIM.

Results

The independent mobility of 795 children
(10.48 6 0.81 years old) was examined using
data from the parental/caregiver survey. Of
these children, 53% were girls and 47% were
boys (Table 1). Most households (55%)
reported a language background at home of
English or French; 32% reported having
lived in the same residence for more than 9
years.
Most surveys were completed by mothers
of children (76%); only 24% of the surveys
were completed by fathers or other adult
caregivers (Table 3). There was no difference
onto, Canada.

in the reported CIM between these two
groups (i.e. mothers versus fathers and other
caregivers; x 2 = 1.98; p = 0.371). Overall,
35% of all parents reported that they never
allowed their children to go out on their own
or with friends (i.e. without adult supervision). 
Only 16% reported that their children
often or always went out independently.
On average, children accumulated 29.366
13.81 minutes of MVPA per day. Linear
regression results demonstrated that CIM
was positively correlated with physical activity, 
even when variations in age and sex were
controlled (Table 4). Children who were
moderately (i.e. sometimes) and highly (i.e.
often or always) independent with regard to
outdoor mobility were likely to accumulate
3.57 and 5 more minutes of MVPA per day
on average (i.e. 14% and 19.5% increase in
the daily MVPA), compared with those who
were never allowed to go out unsupervised.
The results also indicated that boys were
more physically active than girls.
The ordered logit analysis suggests that
several aspects of the perceived neighbourhood 
environment were correlated with
CIM level (Table 5). A child was less likely
to have a higher level of CIM if the parent

was worried about strangers (OR = 0.49),
and was more likely to have a higher level of
CIM when the parent perceived the residential 
neighbourhood as safe (OR = 1.77).
Attractiveness of neighbourhood streets and
the presence of other people ‘talking and
doing things together’ were also associated
with CIM, although the statistical significance 
of these effects was weaker (a =
0.10), particularly when parental travel attitudes 
were added to the model. In addition,
parental travel-related attitudes were correlated 
with children’s mobility behaviour.
The child of a parent who preferred walking,
cycling or transit as modes for travelling was
more likely to have a higher CIM level (OR
= 1.28).

In addition to the perceived neighbourhood 
environment and household travel attitudes, 
boys and older children were more
independent compared with girls and
younger children. Language spoken at home
(i.e. language background) was associated
with CIM (Table 5). The time spent living in
the same residence was also correlated with
independent mobility; higher CIM levels
were more common among children who
lived in the same place for 10 or more years

(OR = 1.38). Lastly, children living in lowincome 
neighbourhoods were more likely to
have higher levels of CIM compared with
those who lived in high-income neighbourhoods 
(OR = 1.47).
A relative comparison of the potential
influence of various aspects that were
explored in our multivariate analysis,
namely (1) age and sex of a child, (2) household’s 
socio-economic characteristics, (3)
parental travel attitudes and (4) perceived
neighbourhood environment, is presented in
Figure 1. The contribution of each of these
aspects (more specifically, of a set of variables 
that represents each aspect) on the
model fit or the improvement of the log likelihood 
was identified and then compared
against each other. The results indicate that
child’s age and sex likely were the most
important factors associated with independent 
mobility, followed by adult perceptions
of neighbourhood environmental quality.
The socio-economic characteristics of a
household had a relatively smaller effect on
the model fit. Of the four aspects that were
explored in this study, parental travel attitudes 
had the smallest contribution in
explaining CIM.

Discussion and conclusion

This paper explored CIM in Toronto,
Canada. To our knowledge, this is the first
North American and Canadian study that
quantitatively examines the correlation
between parental perceptions of the neighbourhood 
environment and CIM in general;
existing research has examined independent
mobility in the context of school travel
(Faulkner et al., 2010; Mammen et al., 2012)
and park-based play (Floyd et al., 2011). In
addition, this paper is likely the first empirical 
work to have explored the association
between a household’s mobility lifestyle and
CIM.
The results presented here suggest that
65% of grade 5 and 6 children in Toronto
were allowed out without adult supervision
at least some of the time. This observed rate
of CIM is lower than what has been reported
in European studies on children of similar
age. For example, Mackett et al. (2007)
reported that 78% of all 10–11 year old children 
in Cheshunt, UK, enjoyed at least some
CIM.
From a public health perspective, our
findings build on the limited evidence base
indicating that CIM supports a child’s daily
accumulation of physical activity (Mackett
et al., 2007; Page et al., 2009; Schoeppe et
al., 2013). CIM was associated with up to
19.5% increase in a child’s daily MVPA on
average. In addition, we found that this
result was persistent across age and sex categories 
(Table 4). This finding fills an important 
gap in North American literature where
empirical data on the association between
CIM and a child’s physical activity level are
particularly scarce. Although caution is
required given the cross-sectional nature of
this research, targeting an increase in opportunities 
for CIM, both in terms of travel and
play, might be a novel approach for interventions 
attempting to increase children’s
physical activity. Such interventions,

however, would need to address some of the
factors that are associated with more or less
independent mobility of children.
With regard to these factors of potential
influence, our results indicate that the perceptions 
of built environment qualities such
as the presence of sidewalks, cross walks, fast
vehicular traffic or shops/restaurants and
long street blocks, are largely uncorrelated
with CIM. This finding contrasts with some
previous studies set in Europe and Australia
that indicated perceived traffic danger and
the absence of street crossings as major barriers 
to CIM (Fyhri et al., 2011; Hillman et
al., 1990; Johansson, 2006; Villanueva et al.,
2012). Instead, we found that in Toronto, the
perceived social qualities of the neighbourhood, 
in particular, parental concerns
around stranger danger (OR = 0.49; p =
0.000) and neighbourhood safety (OR =
1.77; p = 0.003), have potentially major
influences on CIM levels. It is conceivable
that parental assessment of neighbourhood
safety may include elements of traffic conditions 
and neighbourhood design. However,
in our sample, the survey response related to
neighbourhood safety was not correlated (i.e.
r \ 0.25 in all cases) with responses about
traffic conditions, land use mix (i.e. presence
of shops/restaurants) or neighbourhood
design (i.e. long street blocks). As previously
discussed in the literature review, findings
from European and Australian studies,
related to the influence of parental concerns
around a child’s personal safety on CIM,
remain mixed. While some have reported a
correlation between perceived personal safety
and CIM (Alparone and Pacilli, 2012; Prezza,
2007), others have found no statistical association 
between personal safety/stranger danger
concerns and CIM for non-school travel
(Johansson, 2006; Villanueva et al., 2012).
This study, then, presents important contextual 
evidence to inform North American,
especially Canadian, policy focused on children’s 
mobility and physical activity.

The model results also indicate that when
a parent preferred walking, cycling and transit 
as their modes of transportation (i.e.
‘active traveller’), their child was more likely
to have a higher level of CIM (Table 5). This
kind of result points toward a potential generational 
production of a culture of mobility,
wherein we see the modelling or transacting
of mobility behaviour between parents and
their children. The exact causal relationship
between household travel attitudes and CIM
could not be established and remains the
subject of future research. However, two
informed speculations can be offered that
may explain this observed correlation. First,
household members may be captive travellers 
of active modes, in other words, may
have limited or no access to private automobiles 
to escort their children everywhere,
because of income or for other reasons (for
example, those who despite having sufficient
income prefer to avoid automobile ownership 
and use altogether). Second, a parent
who prefers walking, cycling and transit as
travel modes would likely be more aware of
the benefits of active mobility and physical
activity for their child(ren), and consequently, 
would allow him/her to go out on
their own more often.
Several interesting findings also emerged
with regard to the demographic and socioeconomic 
characteristics that suggest that
CIM is not experienced uniformly by children 
and their caregivers, and that interventions 
to promote CIM may need to
recognize and address diversity (e.g. gender,
class, race/ethnicity/culture, social adaptation) 
in children’s mobility. First, our results
confirmed previous observations in suggesting 
that parental decision around CIM is
gendered, and that boys enjoy significantly
higher CIM than girls (Brown et al., 2008;
Fyhri and Hjorthol, 2009; Hillman et al.,
1990; Page et al., 2009; Valentine, 1997).
The more complex issue with regard to gendered 
mobility involves the need to more

closely study the context within which these
gendered differences in CIM emerge
(Hanson, 2010; Murray, 2009).
Second, it appears that a child living in a
low-income neighbourhood was more likely
to be allowed out without adult supervision,
compared with a child living in a highincome 
neighbourhood.
Third, previous research hypothesised
that children who live in households where
both parents work full time, or in single parent 
households, would be less independent
(Fyhri et al., 2011; Tranter and Whitelegg,
1994). Our multivariate analysis provides
empirical evidence that supports this hypothesis, 
and indicates a positive correlation
between lower parental paid workforce
engagement (i.e. at least one adult household
member worked/studied part time or were
home makers, versus all full time workers/
students) and higher CIM levels. However,
this statistical association disappeared once
parental travel-related attitudes were taken
into account (Table 5).
Fourth, our results demonstrated that
those who lived in the current residence for a
longer period (. 9 years) were likely to allow
more CIM. The result possibly indicates that
parental trust in the neighbourhood social
and built environment, as it relates to their
child’s independent mobility outside of
home, is developed through day to day exposure/experience, 
and the acquisition of environmental 
knowledge over time. Previous
research has also reported cross-cultural differences 
in CIM (Hillman et al., 1990;
Mammen et al., 2012; O’Brien et al, 2000;
Shaw et al., 2013; Tranter and Whitelegg,
1994). In our study, CIM was associated
with the language spoken at home. Children
were likely to have lower CIM levels in the
households where other languages (than
English, French or landugages spoken in
Asian countries) were spoken. While this
finding may suggest ethnic or cultural differences 
in CIM as others have previously

reported, we recognise that ethnicity and culture 
are social constructs that are more complex 
than can be reasonably explained by a
household’s spoken language. More research
is clearly needed to improve our understanding 
about children’s mobility and freedom
across different ethnicities and cultures; this
is a particularly salient issue within many
North American cities, and Toronto specifically, 
where population growth depends
largely on immigration.
Findings from the relative comparison of
the potential influences on CIM (Figure 1)
support our initial hypothesis that perceptions 
of the neighbourhood environment significantly 
explained variations in CIM
levels. In comparison, the socio-economic
condition of a household had a relatively
smaller effect on the model fit. Parental
travel attitudes also had a limited influence
in explaining independent mobility of a
child. The overall model fit, however, was
low (r2 = 0.101), suggesting that many
other potential inflences on CIM remains
unexplained. Nevertheless, our findings indicate 
that speculatively an improvement in
perceptions of the neighbourhood environment 
could be an effective way of improving
CIM, and through that, the physical activity
levels of Canadian children.
However, the results from this study
should be interpreted only so far as the data
permit. Adult respondents were asked to
reflect on how often they allow their children 
out on their own or with friends. There
is a conceptual similarity coupled with a lack
of specifity regarding action and place when
we compare this study with the work of
Hillman et al. (1990) and others (Tranter
and Whitelegg, 1994; Watson et al., 2013).
We have probed the issue of adults producing 
CIM by granting permission to their
children to be without them.This permission
is the beginning of locating children within a
setting that is increasingly believed to enable
their psychological and physiological

development (Alparone and Pacilli, 2012;
Page et al., 2010; Prezza, 2007). We have not
looked into the specific points of intersection
between permission and particular actions
such as crossing main roads or travelling to
school without adult supervision. The results
from this study, then, are not directly comparable 
with those where independent mobility
is examined at the micro-scale of specific
childhood activities in particular places (e.g.
Mackett et al., 2007). An exploration of CIM
at the scale of individual activities and mobilities 
scattered across space and time remains a
topic of our ongoing work in Toronto.
As a second limitation, the paper purposefully 
explored parental perceptions of the
neighbourhood environment; objectively
measured built environment characteristics
were not examined. The results from our
analysis, then, do not represent the effects
related to the objectively measurable physical 
environment of a neighbourhood.
Lastly, this study hypothesises that adult
caregivers are the primary decision makers
regarding a child’s mobility (Faulkner et al.,
2010; McMillan, 2005). However, we recognise 
that children may play an important

role in their mobility decisions, particularly
as they develop and mature both cognitively
and through repeated exposure to the neighbourhood 
environment (Bronfenbrenner,
1989; Mitra, 2013; Panter et al., 2008). A
child’s agency in household decisions regarding 
their outdoor mobility was not directly
explored in this study.
This study makes an important contribution 
to an emerging literature on children’s
mobility and physical activity, and the findings 
have important implications for future
policies focused on children’s health and
wellbeing. Improvement in the neighbourhood 
environment is an important area on
which future interventions should concentrate. 
However, our results indicate that
physical environmental interventions, such
as installations of new sidewalks or
Urban Studies 51(16)
implementation of traffic calming measures,
may not be perceived by adults in Toronto,
Canada, or more broadly, in a large North
American city, as offering sufficient cause to
let their children have more independent
mobility. Instead, social qualities of the environment
may enable CIM. As such, urban
planning and public health initiatives may
focus on interventions that enable the production 
and maintenance of social capital
among neighbours, community safety programmes, 
and other neighbourhood-level
surveillance strategies related to a child’s
environmental safety. Such interventions
may also need to be tailored in addressing
the concerns of different types of households, 
for example, those where both parents
work, or who have recently moved to a
neighbourhood, those with different ethnic
and cultural backgrounds, or caregivers
of girl(s). Given the demonstrated benefits of
independent mobility for children, CIM warrants 
greater policy and research attention.