Exploring differences in school travel mode choice behaviour between
children and youth

A child's school travel behaviour may change with the transition toward adolescence. However, the topic
remains understudied in current literature. This paper examines school travel mode choice behaviour of
11-year-old children and 14–15 year old youth in Toronto, Canada. Morning period school trip data was
analysed using multinomial logit models. Distance to school was the most important barrier to walking
for both age groups; neighbourhood built environment characteristics (i.e., major street intersections,
retail density and block density) had a stronger association with a child's odds of walking; and access to
transit was correlated with only a youth's travel mode outcome. In addition, a male youth was more
likely to walk than a female youth; gender of a child was not associated with school travel mode. As
school travel related programmes are beginning to be adapted to the high-school context, our results
indicate that a current North American model that is largely designed around capital improvement of
transport infrastructure may not be very successful. Rather, programmes and initiatives should emphasize 
education, and perhaps attempt to understand and reshape the culture of youth mobility, in
order to encourage healthy and sustainable travel practices.

1. Introduction                                                                            
											
Researchers, policy makers and community-based organizations 
have for some time now recognized the potential importance                           
of active school transportation (AST: travel to/from school by human 
powered modes such as walking and cycling) to the healthy                              
physical and mental development of children. For example, those                            
who regularly walk to and from school are more active overall                              
than those who are driven (Active Healthy Kids Canada, 2014;                               
Faulkner et al., 2009; Mackett, 2013), have greater and/or different                       											
knowledge about their neighbourhood environment, and potetially 
a stronger sense of community (Active Healthy Kids Canada,										
2014; Fusco et al., 2012). In addition, recent research in the US										
estimated that 10–14% of all private automobiles on the road										
during morning peak hours are related to school trips (McDonald										
et al., 2011). Notably, most of these school trips are relatively short,                   
and can potentially be substituted by other more sustainable options 
such as walking, cycling and transit; modes that if used could                       
reduce vehicular emissions, free up road space during peak hours,                               
and reduce the risk of pedestrian–motor vehicle collisions                                 
											
(Badland and Scho<U+FB01>eld, 2005; McDonald et al., 2013).
Despite potential bene<U+FB01>ts, current school transportation research 
has reported a steady decline in AST and transit use across
the Western nations over the last <U+FB01>ve decades (Buliung et al.,
2009; Fyhri et al., 2011; McDonald, 2007; van der Ploeg et al.,
2008). Most of these walking, cycling and transit trips were replaced 
by trips in private automobiles. Not surprisingly, then, an
emerging literature has explored school travel behaviour, in order
to understand and potentially reverse the current trend. With
regard to AST correlates, the literature has largely focused on four
major aspects: (a) distance (e.g., McDonald, 2008a; Schlossberg
et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2012), (b) neighbourhood built and the
social environment related to traf<U+FB01>c and personal safety (e.g.,
Larsen et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013; Mitra and Buliung, 2014; Panter
et al., 2010a), (c) neighbourhood walkability (e.g., Lee et al., 2013;
Yang et al., 2012) and (d) the activity and travel patterns of parents
or adult caregivers (e.g., McDonald, 2008b; Mitra and Buliung,
2014; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008). A detailed discussion of
this literature can be found elsewhere (Mitra, 2013; Stewart, 2011).
However, the results from this literature are sometimes at odds
with each other, particularly with regard to the in<U+FB02>uence of the
neighbourhood environment. For example, while higher residential 
density (McDonald, 2008a) and mixed land use (McMillan, 
2007; Mitra and Buliung, 2014) were identi<U+FB01>ed by some as
potential enablers of walking, others have reported negative or no
												
association (Larsen et al. 2012; Yang et al., 2012; Yarlagadda and
Srinivasan, 2008). Similarly, higher street density associated with
the likelihood of walking in some case studies (Panter et al., 2010b;
Yang et al., 2012); in others, a negative association was documented 
(Schlossberg et al., 2006). Several external effects such as
differences in school policy (Yang et al., 2012) and the cultural and
policy-related contexts around mobility in general (Mitra, 2013)
may explain the inconclusive and often mixed results, in addition
to, of course, historically rooted differences in neighbourhood
design. Part of the problem may also relate to how children’s
mobility is conceptualized. One such conceptual aspect that remains 
relatively less examined in current literature is the potentially 
moderating effect of a child’s age on school transportation
mode choice behaviour.
Recent theoretical works on children’s mobility, such as the
ones by Panter et al. (2008) and Mitra (2013), emphasize that
various in<U+FB02>uences on a child’s/youth’s school travel outcome can
be moderated by a child’s age. The ecological theories of human
behaviour (Bandura, 1989; Bronfenbrenner, 1989) posit that a child
develops and matures through an active interplay with the environment 
(or the psychological construction of the environment).
Previous research also indicates that parental perception of a
child’s “maturity” was associated with unsupervised walking and
cycling (Johansson, 2006; Prezza et al., 2001). Drawing on this
literature, Mitra (2013) conceptualized that through repeated exposure 
to the neighbourhood environment, a child develops physical 
and cognitive capabilities of navigating the neighbourhood
environment and urban streets. One proxy measure of this development 
can be his/her age. Conceivably, a household’s attitudes
or evaluations toward a child’s capability of travelling to/from
school unsupervised on foot, cycle or by transit may change with a
child’s perceived maturity with age. Children may also become
more independent decision makers as they transition into teenage
years (i.e., 412 years), and their mode choice process may differentiate 
from that of their parents.
Many studies have recognized this potential “age effect” on
school travel decision processes, and in response, have explored
travel behaviour of speci<U+FB01>c age groups (e.g., Larsen et al., 2013;
Mitra and Buliung, 2014; Panter et al., 2010a; Schlossberg et al.,
2006). However, a very limited literature has examined and
compared the potential in<U+FB02>uences on school travel outcomes
across multiple age groups, providing deeper insights into how
school travel behaviour might change with a child’s age and perhaps 
with improved maturity. For example, Timperio et al. (2006)
explored the correlates of walking between children aged 5–6
years and 11–12 years in Melbourne, Australia. Their results indicate 
that for both age groups, parental perception of the absence
of other children in the neighbourhood, the absence of street lights
or crossings, and the presence of major barriers on the way to
school may reduce the likelihood of walking. However, some differences 
across the two age groups were also reported. Younger
children (5–6 years) were less likely to walk or cycle if their travel
routes to school had steep slopes. In comparison, older children
(10–12 years) with direct travel routes to school (representing
well-connected streets, and perhaps with busy traf<U+FB01>c, in comparison 
to poorly connected streets) were less likely to travel actively.
In a study of US school children/youth aged 5–14 years and 15–
18 years, McDonald (2008b) also reported some important agerelated 
differences in school travel behaviour. For the o 15 years
age cohort, a child’s age was positively associated with the likelihood 
of walking to school, while for the 15–18 years group, age
was not associated with the travel mode outcome. Similarly, o15
year old children were less likely to walk when their mothers
travelled to work in the morning; an older youth’s travel outcome
was not associated with his/her parents’ travel patterns. Urban
residential density was associated with walking across both age

groups.
This paper takes a similar approach to McDonald (2008b) and
Timperio et al. (2006) in exploring the differences (or similarities)
in school travel mode choice behaviour between elementary
school students aged 11 years (5th/6th grade) and high school
students aged 14–15 years (9th/10th grade) in Toronto, Canada.
The paper advances our current understanding of school travel
behaviour by contributing to a very limited literature that has
investigated potential changes in the correlates of AST as children
age. An emphasis on the differences in neighbourhood environment-related 
correlates across the two age groups is particularly
novel in the North American context.
In addition, the <U+FB01>ndings from this study has direct implications
for transportation policy that is centred on children’s mobility and
well being, particularly in the context of recent community and
professional interests in Canada around promoting and facilitating
AST among older youth. The School Travel Planning (STP) programmes 
in Canada, similar to the Federally legislated Safe Routes
to School (SRTS) programmes in the US, are designed for elementary 
and middles schools (Green Communities Canada, 2014;
National Center for Safe Routes to School, 2011). At the time when
school boards across Canada are showing increased commitment
to active, safe and sustainable transportation of their students
(e.g., Toronto District School Board, 2014; Waterloo Region District
School Board, 2011), the STP model is beginning to be adapted to
the high school context (Stuckless, 2012). Findings from this study
can inform such adaptations and implementations, and the development 
of new programmes and interventions in Canada, the
US and elsewhere focused broadly on the health of children and
the youth.


2. Study design

2.1. Study area

The City of Toronto is the largest city as well as the business/
<U+FB01>nancial capital of Canada with a population of 2.6 million (Statistics Canada, 2012). 
Steady population growth over the last
century, and political amalgamation of Toronto’s older neighbourhoods 
with the inner ring suburbs in the late 1990s, have
produced a city with neighbourhoods that are diverse with regard
to built form, politics, and preferences for housing and transport.
The downtown and inner-city neighbourhoods have high walkability, 
while automobile oriented “planned suburban” design
dominates the inner-suburban neighbourhoods that became part
of the City during a political amalgamation in 1998.
Most children in Toronto attend publicly funded schools; a
recent study reported that 88% of all 5th/6th grade students were
travelling to public schools (Mitra and Buliung, 2014). The two
publicly funded school boards (Toronto District School Board:
TDSB, and faith based Toronto Catholic District School Board:
TCDSB) maintain small travel distance thresholds (through school
districting/catchments), and children/youth are generally expected
to attend the school that is closest to their residential location.

2.2. Data

School travel data from the 2006 Transportation Tomorrow
Survey (TTS) was analysed. TTS is a large cross-sectional survey of
travel behaviour that is conducted every <U+FB01>ve years since 1986
(Data Management Group, 2009). The 2006 version includes a 5.2%
random sample of all households in Southern Ontario, including
the City of Toronto (approximately 150,000 households in total;
51,500 households in Toronto). The survey includes retrospective
travel data for all household trips by Z11 year olds (e.g., origin/


destination, trip start time, purpose, primary travel mode) for a
randomly selected weekday in fall or winter (Data Management
Group, 2009). An adult household member proxy-reported
household trips for the day prior to interview.
Within the context of this study, we de<U+FB01>ned a “youth” as a
student who is 4 13 years old, i.e., who likely attends high school
(Stuckless, 2012). Home-to-school trips with start times between
6 am and 9 am, by 11 year-old children (i.e., typically 5th/6th
Grade) and 14–15 year old youth (i.e., typically 9th/10th grade)
were analysed. School travel behaviour of o11 year old children
could not be examined because of data unavailability; youth aged
415 years were excluded with an expectation that school travel
behaviour may change signi<U+FB01>cantly once a youth reaches legal
driving age (i.e., 16 years in Toronto). Only children and youth
travelling to public and Catholic schools were studied. Those attending 
private/special schools were excluded; these schools tend
to serve households who self-select their children’s school, and as
a result, a child/youth may often have to travel longer or have
specialized school transport needs (e.g., more busing and/or
driving).
This paper explored four school travel modes (walk, transit,
school bus and car). Other excluded modes including cycle constituted 
less than one percent of all school trips. Also, high schools
are larger and are located farther apart than the elementary
schools. As a result, older youth typically travel longer distances
for school travel. In order to keep the results comparable between
the two subpopulations of this study, only children and youth
living within 3.2 km (2 mile) network distance from their schools
were included in the analysis. We assumed that beyond this distance, 
the feasibility of walking for a child/youth reduces
signi<U+FB01>cantly.
Multiple levels of in<U+FB02>uence on school travel mode choice were
hypothesized based on previous theoretical works on this topic
(McMillan, 2005; Mitra, 2013; Panter et al., 2008). Information on
household socio-demographics was obtained from the TTS. Following 
Mitra (2013), we also hypothesized that a youth’s travel
modes will be more independent from travel characteristics of
other household members, compared to a child. For example, we
hypothesize that a youth’s school travel outcome will be less dependent 
on the presence of other children in the household or the
availability of adult caregivers at the time of school travel. The TTS
survey allowed the construction of some variables related to these
intra-household social and travel interactions (Table 1). However,
the 2006 TTS does not provide data on the kinship relations
among household members (e.g., mother, father, sister, brother).
As a result, parental availability (i.e., a mother’s availability, father’s 
availability, or the travel supervisory roles within same sex
households) could not be explored separately.
Data on actual travel routes were not available. As a result,
travel distances between home and school locations were estimated. 
For walk mode, network distance between home and
school locations was used; for car mode, network distance with
driving restrictions was used; for school bus and transit modes,
straight line distance was used. In particular, two distance categories 
were explored: r400 m (i.e., approximately 5 min walking
distance for a child or youth) and 41.6 km (i.e., approximately
20 min walking distance; 1.6 km or 1 mi also represents typical
catchment areas for TDSB elementary schools). Data on the
neighbourhood built environment came from several sources,
which are described in Table 1. Consistent with some previous
studies on school travel behaviour (Mitra and Buliung, 2014;
Schlossberg et al., 2006; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008), built
environment characteristics were measured within a 400 m
straight line buffer distance of each student’s home locations,
which is roughly equivalent to a 5-min walking distance for a

2.3. Statistical analysis

The correlates of school travel modes were explored using
multinomial (conditional) logit models, which is a widely used

approach in the school transportation literature (McDonald,
2008a; Mitra and Buliung, 2014; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008).
Separate models were estimated to explore school travel behaviour 
of each of the two age groups. The neighbourhood built
environment was assumed to primarily in<U+FB02>uence the decision
between walking and other modes. Prior to multivariate logit estimation, 
the degree of multi-collinearity among built environment 
variables was also examined. None of the built environment
characteristics were correlated with each other at r Z 0.50. Adjusting 
for missing data and outliers, the <U+FB01>nal dataset included 945
home-to-school trips by 11 year olds and 1269 trips by 14–15 year
olds.
The relative importance of various potential in<U+FB02>uences in explaining 
school travel outcome (i.e., the effect on model <U+FB01>t) was
graphed. Variables related to each aspect shown in this <U+FB01>gure (i.e.,
one or more variables that represent each aspect, Table 1) were
added to the multivariate model sequentially, and each aspect’s
contribution on the improvement of the log likelihood was identi<U+FB01>ed. 
Standardized values (i.e., % contribution to log likelihood
improvement) were plotted to facilitate comparison between
children and the youth.

3. Results

Differences and similarities in school travel mode choice behaviour 
between 11 year old children and 14–15 year old youth,
for home-to-school trips in the morning, were explored using
multivariate logit models. Table 2 describes the data that were
analysed in this paper. Most of the travel data were collected
during the Fall season (September to mid-December), when the
typical weather conditions in Toronto are more suitable for walking 
compared to the Winter season (Mitra and Faulkner, 2012). For
example in 2006, the mean temperature in October was 9.7 °C,
compared to  2.4 °C in February (Environment Canada, 2011).
The two samples were comparable with respect to their sociodemographic 
characteristics. However, the youth travelled longer
to get to their schools; 41% of them lived between 1.6 and 3.2 km
from their schools, compared to only 13% children who lived that

far (Table 2). Approximately 61% of all 11-year old children walked

to school; walk mode share for the older youth was also similar at
58%. The biggest differences were in the use of transit and school
bus. More children travelled to schools in school buses, while
youth used public transit more often.
Fig. 1 shows the difference in walking rates by distance between 
the two age groups. While the overall walking rates for the
two age groups were similar, this <U+FB01>gure suggests that within the
3.2 km cut-off distance, high school students (i.e., 14–15 year olds)
typically walked longer than elementary school students (i.e., 11
year olds). For example, almost half (47%) of all high school students 
walked to school at a distance of 2 km, while only 24% of all
elementary school students walked at that distance.
Results from multivariate analyses are summarized in Table 3.
Distance to school was strongly associated with travel mode
choice, for both age groups. In addition to distance, both children
and youth were more likely to walk when the potential school
routes were more indirect. Other than route indirectness, the
neighbourhood built environment was largely uncorrelated with a
youth’s likelihood of walking. By contrast, several built environment 
characteristics, namely the absence of major street crossing
en-route to school, high density of retail land use and smaller
street blocks, were associated with a child’s walking trip to school.
With regard to intra-household travel interactions, parental (or
adult caregiver living in the same household) unavailability at the
time of school travel was positively correlated with walk, transit
and school bus use among both children and youth, while a

household’s driving propensity (i.e., private-automobile mode
share for daily household trips, excluding the school trips) was
positively correlated with a driven school trip. The presence of
other school age children in the household (attending the same or
different schools) increased the probability of walking and using
transit for 11-year old children. No such association was observed
for older youth.
A household’s automobile ownership was associated with drive
trips to school, but the relationship was stronger among children
compared to youth (Table 3). The gender of a 11-year old child did
not correlate with walking (versus being driven), however a male
youth aged 14–15 years was 1.57 times (Odds Ratio, OR ¼e0.45)
more likely to walk to school than a female of that same age.
A youth living in a low-income neighbourhood with greater
access to public transit was more likely to use transit as the school

travel mode. Youth were also less likely to walk to school in Winter
months. These factors were not associated with a child's school 
travel mode outcome. School type was correlated with travel
mode choice. Children attending Catholic schools were 13.2 times
more likley to tkae a school bus to school. A similar association
was observed among youth though the effect sice was realtively
smaller (OR = 3.71)
Fig.2 summerizes the abovementioned similarities and differences
between children and youth with regards to the correlates of 
school travelmode outcomes. The figure shows relative effects of
different types of influences on mode choice behaviour. More 
specifically, it compares the contribution of each aspect (i.e., one or
a group of variables, in Table 3) to the % improvement in the log 
likelihood of the estimate logit models. Distance to school was 
clearly the most important correlate for both age groups, followed 
by household-level travel interactions (e.g., parental unvailability).
School system (i.e., Catholic versus publisc schools) was a 
potentially larger predictor os a child's travel outcome. The 
neighbourhood built environment, as whole, also had a relatively 
stronger effect on a child's mode choice compared to that of a 
youth

4. Discussion and conclusions

This study examined differences in the correlates of school
travel mode outcomes between children and youth. We conceptualized 
that a child’s actual or perceived maturity with age
(Bronfenbrenner, 1989; Mitra, 2013) might produce some differences 
between children and youth in how parents or a child/youth
choose travel mode to school. In exploring these differences,
multiple levels of in<U+FB02>uence were hypothesized. Particular importance 
was placed on the neighbourhood built environment and
travel dependence on other household members. Findings from
this study contribute to a very limited literature that examines
difference in the correlates of travel modes between children and
youth (McDonald, 2008b; Timperio et al., 2006).
This study is particularly relevant in the context of signi<U+FB01>cant
policy interest and investment over the last decade that are aimed
at improving walking and cycling among school-going children/
youth. For example in the US, more than $879 million was appropriated 
to State DOTs between 2005 and 2012, for the implementation 
of SRTS programmes near elementary and middle
schools (McDonald et al., 2013). The related Federal legislation
(SAFETEA-LU) earmarked 70–90% of the allocated funds toward
infrastructure improvement, and as a result, improvements in the
built environment (particularly those related to traf<U+FB01>c safety such
as sidewalks and traf<U+FB01>c calming measures) have remained the
major focus of the SRTS programmes (McDonald et al., 2013; National 
Center for Safe Routes to School, 2011).
In contrast, STP programmes in Canada remain largely community-driven, 
without any dedicated government funding, with
only occasional partnering with and funding from government
agencies (Green Communities Canada, 2014). As a result, the STP
interventions have focused more on education and less on physical
infrastructure. However, recent research has reported at best a
moderate impact of SRTS and STP interventions on AST rates
(Boarnet et al., 2005; Mammen et al., 2014), indicating the need
for systematic research that would improve our current understanding 
of school travel mode choice behaviour to inform development 
of future interventions, and to reshape interventions to
improve their alignment with the particular populations they are
intended to in<U+FB02>uence.
In addition, the current focus of SRTS and STP programmes on
elementary/middle schools can bene<U+FB01>t only a proportion of all
students who can potentially take up walking and cycling as travel

modes to/from school. In other words, a large number of students
who attend high schools remain excluded from these interventions.
Not surprisingly, the feasibility of adapting the STP framework 
to the high school context has received some recent attention. 
Between 2010 and 2012, Green Communities Canada has
implemented modi<U+FB01>ed-STP programmes in seven high schools in
Ottawa (Stuckless, 2012). Two major challenges/opportunities
were identi<U+FB01>ed based on outcomes from these pilot interventions.
First, youth are more independent decision makers and travellers,
compared to younger children who are more dependent on adult
caregivers. Second, youth may report a negative perception toward
walking, unlike younger children who typically like to walk to/
from school and consider AST as “cool” (Stuckless, 2012). Clearly
there are different cultures of mobility within the child and youth
populations – these differences need to be adequately exposed and
understood with a view to developing targeted, successful interventions 
within these disparate populations. The research that is
presented in this paper begins to provide insights into these differences 
by means of empirical evidence of the variations in the
correlates of school travel outcomes. The remainder of this section
discusses these results and outlines their potential implications.
Previous research has consistently reported lower AST rates
among older youth, compared to younger children who attend
elementary schools (Buliung et al., 2009; McDonald, 2007; van der
Ploeg et al., 2008). The primary reason for this difference may be
geographical. Longer travel distances to high schools may make
walking/cycling a less attractive option for some high-school students. 
Results from this study also support this hypothesis, indicating 
that in general 14–15 year old students live farther away
from their schools compared to younger students (Table 2).
However, we also found that high school students (i.e., 14–15
years) typically walked longer than elementary school students
(i.e., 11 year olds), indicating that when adapted in the context of a
high school, programmes similar to STP or SRTS may not necessarily 
have to target only those students who live within close
proximity of their schools.
In addition to distance, concern for traf<U+FB01>c and personal safety
has previously been identi<U+FB01>ed as a major barrier to AST (Fyhri
et al., 2011; Larsen et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013; Panter et al., 2010a).
Our results were similar, suggesting statistical association between
walking and the neighbourhood environmental characteristics
that may relate to safety along school travel routes. For example,
the absence of major road crossings and perhaps major roads (an

aspect that is indirectly captured here by the variable INDIRECT)
likely improves safety from traf<U+FB01>c (Schlossberg et al., 2006; Mitra
and Buliung, 2014; Timperio et al., 2006). Mixed land use (e.g.,
high retail density) and smaller blocks are also characteristics that
are typically representative of “walkable” neighbourhoods. All of
these characteristics were positively associated with a child’s odds
of walking to school. For youth, however, the built environment
was largely uncorrelated with travel mode (Table 3 and Fig. 2).
This difference is interesting but not surprising. Recent research
indicates that while parents (i.e., adult caregivers) are typically
concerned about a child’s traf<U+FB01>c and personal safety related to the
neighbourhood environment, children may not necessarily perceive 
the neighbourhood environment as a major barrier to
walking (Fusco et al., 2012). Perhaps as a result, when children
grow up and become more independent decision makers (with
regard to school travel) as youth, the characteristics of the built
environment become a less important consideration in choosing
transportation mode to school. This <U+FB01>nding is signi<U+FB01>cant from a
policy perspective because it suggests that typical SRTS-type interventions 
that emphasize improved traf<U+FB01>c safety (e.g., sidewalk
development, traf<U+FB01>c calming) may have limited effect in modifying
youth travel behaviour.
Transit ridership was higher (22%) among 14–15 year old youth
than for children (5%), which is another indication of their perceived 
capability of independently navigating the neighbourhood
environment and urban streets. Better access to transit increased
the odds of youth transit use. Transit is more environmentally
sustainable compared to private automobiles (Newman and Kenworthy, 1999), 
and because most transit trips involve some walking, 
they contribute to overall physical activity accumulation
(Besser and Dannenberg, 2005; Lachapelle and Frank, 2009). A
positive correlation between transit access and use is then encouraging, 
and indicates that improved transit infrastructure, a
goal that most North American cities including Toronto are striving 
to achieve, may also encourage sustainable and healthy travel
behaviour among youth, at least when it comes to travelling to and
from school.
For children who attended Catholic schools, the average travel
distance was only 0.12 km higher than those who attended public
schools. For youth, average travel distance between two school
systems was not statistically signi<U+FB01>cant at a ¼0.05. However, the
models revealed a strong correlation between school system and
school bus use. Children and youth attending Catholic schools
were more likely to travel to school by school bus, compared to
those attending public schools. Previous research based in Toronto
has also reported a similar association (Mitra and Buliung, 2014),
which can partly be explained by a <U+FB02>exible school transportation
policy (i.e., eligibility for a school bus) of the Catholic School Board
(TCDSB). The Catholic schools often provide transportation to
students who live much closer to 1.5 km, arguably to attract students 
to schools with declining enrollment (Mitra and Buliung,
2014). This <U+FB01>nding offers evidence of the power the boards have in
shaping patterns of school travel.
With regard to household level in<U+FB02>uences, we found that both
child and youth school travel modes were associated with parental
availability at the time of school travel. In other words, parental
availability was related to a higher likelihood of automobile trips.
A youth’s school travel was also gendered; our results indicate that
male students aged 14–15 years were more likely to walk compared 
to female students (Table 3). These <U+FB01>ndings are contradictory 
to our initial conceptualization of older youth as independent 
travellers, but are not entirely surprising. Previous research 
has reported a systematic decline in children’s independent
mobility over the last decades, and has argued that constant adult
supervision has become an essential component of modern
childhood (Timperio et al., 2006; Hillman et al., 1990; Mitra et al.,

2014). While this existing literature primarily focuses on young
children, our results suggest that the same hypothesis may also
hold true for older youth, although the overall effect of intrahousehold 
travel interactions on their school travel may be smaller
for this age group (Fig. 2). In other words, while the youth may
enjoy some degree of independence with regard to travel decision
making, their actual mobility, at least to some extent, remains
subject to parental supervision. Although unobservable here, there
is strong qualitative evidence regarding the gendered and generational 
quality of the good parenting model, and the impact of
the risk and mobility experiences of mothers on household travel
decisions and the greater supervision of the mobility of girls
(Murray, 2009).
The scope of this investigation was somewhat limited because
of the data used. TTS is a trip-based survey and consequently,
variables related to intra-household travel interactions are approximate 
and were derived based on some assumptions. In other
words, the actual extent of travel dependence (i.e., whether a
child/youth travelled to school alone, with siblings/friends, or with
parents) could not be completely ascertained. It is also conceivable
that a youth’s and his/her parents’ perceptions toward the
neighbourhood environment and attitude toward school travel (or
travel in general, in particular, preference toward travel mode or
independence) may in<U+FB02>uence school travel behaviour. In fact, a
recent Canadian pilot study reported that walking and cycling are
perceived by high school students as “hard, inconvenient and uncool”, 
and this negative perception was a major barrier in promoting 
AST among youth (Stuckless, 2012). However, the TTS does
not collect information on neighbourhood perceptions or travel
attitudes, and as a result, these potential in<U+FB02>uences were left unexplored. 
Lastly, travel behaviour of two groups of students was
studied here and the correlates of travel modes were compared.
While the samples were large enough to produce statistically reliable 
results, the data was not longitudinal. In other words, we did
not directly explore changes in travel behaviour as children grow
up.
Despite some limitations, <U+FB01>ndings from this study have important 
implications for policy and practice. The current model of
school travel related interventions that are primarily designed
around transportation infrastructure (e.g., SRTS in the US) may not
be very successful if and when implemented in the context of high
schools. Instead, programmes and initiatives focused on high
school students should emphasize education and promotion of
AST, and perhaps attempt to understand and reshape the culture
of youth mobility. Based on the <U+FB01>ndings of this study, it appears
that educational programmes that encourage youth, particularly
female youth as well as their parents, to become more independent 
travellers may increase AST rates among this sub-population, 
and in the long term, potentially improve their physical
and psychological health and well being.