Built environment correlates of active school transportation: neighborhood
and the modi<U+FB01>able areal unit problem

abstract
Researchers, practitioners and community-based organizations have emphasized built environment
interventions to encourage active school transportation, a practice that can contribute to the overall
physical activity needs of children. This paper examines the potential in<U+FB02>uence of the modi<U+FB01>able areal
unit problem (MAUP) on statistical modeling of the relationship between the built environment and
walking/cycling to school. Binomial logistic regressions of school travel mode choice for children aged
11–12 years, in the City of Toronto, Canada, were estimated, using six spatial units for measuring built
environment characteristics. The results were suggestive of the presence of MAUP across different geographical 
units. Travel distance, block density, signalized intersections, walking density, and schools in
low-income neighborhoods were associated with active travel. This research improves understanding
of the sensitivity of school travel behavior analyses to the spatial representation of the neighborhood
construct.


1. Introduction                                                                            
											
An emerging literature in the past decade has explored children’s 
school travel behavior (Pont et al., 2009; Sirard and Slater,                       
2008). This research is matched with a policy concern about                                
declining levels of physical activity among children and youth                             
(Faulkner et al., 2009; Frumkin et al., 2004; US Department of                             
Health and Human Services, 1996). Walking or cycling for school                            
transportation, a behavior that is also known as active school                             
transportation (AST), has been identi<U+FB01>ed as a potential opportunity                        
for the accumulation of moderate to vigorous physical activity                             
among children and youth. Researchers, professionals and community-based 
organizations have emphasized built environment                                 
interventions at the neighborhood level as one approach to facilitate 
AST (McMillan, 2007; National Center for Safe Routes to                               
School, 2007; Ontario Professional Planners Institute, 2009; US                                
Department of Health and Human Services, 2009).                                            
Studies of adult travel behavior have demonstrated that the built                     
environment, including land use distribution within a neighborhood, 
transportation infrastructure, and urban design characteristics, 
may encourage active transportation, particularly walking                            
(Ewing and Cervero, 2010; Transportation Research Board, 2005).                            
Empirical <U+FB01>ndings on children’s school travel outcomes, however,                           
remain less conclusive. Some studies have reported that children                           
											
living in neighborhoods with higher residential density (Kerr
et al., 2006; Lin and Chang, 2010; McDonald, 2008a) and mixed land
use (Lin and Chang, 2010; Larsen et al., 2009; McMillan, 2007) were
more likely to walk for school travel purposes, while in other studies 
the opposite effect has been reported (Ewing et al., 2004; Mitra
et al., 2010; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008). With regard to transportation 
infrastructure, some researchers have found that higher
street density associates with walking among children (Panter
et al., 2010); others have reported a negative association between
street intersection density and walking (Schlossberg et al., 2006).
Positive correlations have been reported between the presence
and density of sidewalks and AST (Boarnet et al., 2005; Ewing
et al., 2004; Lin and Chang, 2010); in other studies no statistical
association was found between sidewalk density and mode choice
(Panter et al., 2010).
The effect of the neighborhood built environment has been explored 
using different spatial units in different studies. For example, 
in some studies, the built environment was measured within
a 400 m (Mitra et al., 2010; Schlossberg et al., 2006), 800 m (Larsen
et al., 2009; Panter et al., 2010) or 1 km (Kerr et al., 2006) straight
line buffer distance of a child’s home or school location; census
boundaries have been used to represent the neighborhood construct 
in some other studies (Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald,
2008b). The main hypothesis of this paper is that some of the
inconsistency in empirical <U+FB01>ndings of this literature may be related
to the modi<U+FB01>able areal unit problem (MAUP), a measurement issue
comprised of scale and zoning effects (Amrhein, 1995; Gehlke and
Biehl, 1934; Openshaw, 1984; Openshaw and Alvandies, 1999). In

the context of school travel behavior research, a scale effect may be
present when analytical results exhibit sensitivity to the size of
spatial units used for built environment measurement. For example, 
the use of a relatively small spatial unit, such as a 250 m buffer
around a residential or school location, may produce unreliable
statistical results, because the built environment variables are
aggregated using a smaller sample. In contrast, generalizing the value 
of a built environment metric across a larger geographical unit
(e.g., within a 1000 m versus a 250 m buffer) will typically reduce
the sample variance for that particular metric, while increasing the
correlation between separate built environment variables. As a result, 
an observed statistical association may mask meaningful differences 
that are obvious at a smaller scale (Bailey and Gatrell,
1995; Fotheringham and Wong, 1991). A zoning effect may be
present when analytical results are sensitive to the partitioning
of space. For example, different zone con<U+FB01>gurations under a <U+FB01>xed
scale may produce dissimilar results.
Despite a long-standing recognition in the geography literature
of the potential sensitivity of analytical results to the geographical
de<U+FB01>nition of spatial units, the MAUP has received less attention in
research that examines the built environment–transportation relationship. 
Some researchers have investigated the scale and zoning
effects of different built environment metrics on adults’ active travel 
and physical activity. For example, Zhang and Kukadia (2005)
explored mode choice for work and non-work trips in Boston, Massachusetts, 
using two different scale and zoning schemes (<U+FB01>ve buffers 
and three census boundaries). The results indicated the
presence of both scale and zoning effects across spatial units. Berke
et al. (2007) examined the relationship between neighborhood
walkability, and physical activity or obesity, among the elderly in
King County, Washington. Their results suggested that the built
environment in<U+FB02>uenced walking across all three buffer distances
that were examined. Lastly, Duncan et al. (2010) investigated physical 
activity (i.e., walking for transportation) among adults living in
154 Census Collection Districts (CCD) in Adelaide, Australia. The
authors found that the duration of walking trips had a stronger
association with ‘‘corrected’’ measures of land use mix (i.e., standardized 
based on the geographical size of CCDs), compared to
the uncorrected land use measures within CCDs. Adjusting for
scale effects did not improve the results reported for models walking 
trip frequency. The MAUP is yet to be addressed in the AST
literature.
This paper examines the previously unexplored issue of how
the MAUP may be in<U+FB02>uencing the results of empirical research into
the relationship between objectively measured built environment
characteristics and children’s school travel behavior, particularly
the choice of active modes of travel to school. Two research questions 
are considered using data describing the travel behavior of
11–12 year olds in the City of Toronto, Canada: (1) at what scale
and for what type of zone system does the neighborhood built
environment have the strongest association with AST? and (2)
which built environment characteristics near home and school
locations are associated with the choice of an active mode for trips
to school? The article contributes a re<U+FB01>ned understanding of how
to model the built environment–active school transportation
(BE–AST) relationship, with a view to enhancing cross-study comparison. 
The research also improves current knowledge of the environmental 
correlates of school travel mode choice in a North
American context.

2. Study design

The City of Toronto is the largest city in Canada, with a resident
population of over 2.5 million (Statistics Canada, 2008). The innercity 
neighborhoods in Toronto typically conform to what are

known as main-street neighborhoods (i.e., residential neighborhoods 
with employment-related land uses along the main streets)
in both the academic and popular literatures (Sewell, 1993). The
re-urbanization trend of the last several decades, which has been
hastened in recent years by favorable policy and market conditions, 
has brought pockets of high-rise and high-density residential
developments to these neighborhoods. In contrast, the City of Toronto’s 
suburban places are dominated by Modernist conventional
neighborhoods typically characterized by single-use residential
development and a street network design (e.g., curvilinear streets)
that is often associated with auto-oriented travel behavior.
AST is reasonably well practiced in the City of Toronto. In
2006, 49% of children aged 11–13 years actively traveled to
school. For the trips from school to home, the rate was even higher 
(56%) (Buliung et al., 2009). Toronto’s diverse urban environment 
and high rates of walking/cycling for school transportation
offer an excellent opportunity to explore the in<U+FB02>uence of the built
environment characteristics on children’s school travel mode
choice processes.
This study aims to examine the potential in<U+FB02>uence of MAUP on
the statistical modeling of the BE–AST relationship. Several recommendations 
have been made in the literature to explore scale and
zoning effects (Fotheringham and Wong, 1991; Openshaw, 1984;
Zhang and Kukadia, 2005). Some researchers have suggested an
examination of the underlying pattern in the estimated coef<U+FB01>cients
of the built environment variables across different scales and zone
systems (Fotheringham and Wong, 1991; Zhang and Kukadia,
2005). This approach is tested here by modeling the BE–AST relationship 
using different spatial units and analytical scales for the
representation of neighborhoods. With regard to the correlates of
AST, this study adopts a social–ecological approach and hypothesizes 
that household demographics, travel distance to school, and
the neighborhood environment in<U+FB02>uence the selection of school
travel modes (McMillan, 2005; Mitra, 2011; Sirard and Slater,
2008).

2.1. Travel data

Data were taken from the 2006 Transportation Tomorrow Survey 
(TTS). The TTS is a repeated cross-sectional survey of travel
behavior in Southern Ontario, Canada, conducted on a 5% sample
of all households in the study area. The 2006 TTS data were collected 
for a randomly selected weekday, using a computer assisted
telephone interview procedure (Data Management Group, 2008,
2009). Household travel data (e.g., origin/destination of trips, trip
start time, purpose, primary travel mode) for all trips by household
members aged 11 years and older, associated with the day prior to
the interview, were proxy reported by an adult household member.
Previous research indicates that school travel behavior can change
with a child’s age (Buliung et al., 2009; Mitra, 2011; Panter et al.,
2008). In order to limit the scope of this study to a relatively
homogenous population, school travel data for children aged 11–
12 years (i.e., likely attending grades 5 or 6) were explored. All
home-to-school trips between the 6h00–9h30 time interval
(n = 2520) were extracted. Travel modes were collapsed into active
(i.e., walking and cycling trips) and passive (i.e., trips made by a
private automobile, public transit or school-bus) modes, using
the proxy reported data on primary mode of travel for school trips.

2.2. Neighborhood and built environment data

The modern conceptualization of the planned neighborhood
unit emerged in the early 1900s (Banerjee and Baer, 1984; Perry,
1939). The design principles of a neighborhood unit emphasized
Modernist concepts of spatial separation between home and work,
and a hierarchical street system (Banerjee and Baer, 1984; Moudon

et al., 2006). Elementary schools, community centers and other
smaller urban facilities were planned as central features of a neighborhood, 
with surrounding residential development scaled to be
within a convenient walking distance (e.g., a 0.25 mi, or 400 m, radial 
distance) from the these facilities. The post World War II suburban 
developments in Toronto were dominated by a widespread
implementation of the neighborhood unit idea (Filion and Hammond, 
2003; Hess, 2009). Urban planners assumed that within
the boundaries of a neighborhood, non residential activities of residents 
will ‘‘<U+FB02>ow toward the core’’ (Banerjee and Baer, 1984, pp
183–4). However, this planning goal never fully materialized, perhaps 
because most neighborhood centers did not offer essential
and desired services. Instead, these suburban neighborhoods have
led to an increased dependency on automobiles. Within this context, 
previous research has indicated that the physical extent of a
neighborhood unit may be less important to households, and that
a household’s perceived neighborhood boundary can largely be de<U+FB01>ned 
based on the ‘‘action space’’ within which the household
members perform their daily activities, and consume goods and
services (Banerjee and Baer, 1984; Horton and Reynolds, 1971).
This observation, perhaps, is applicable to the older inner-city residential 
areas as well, where the borders between the ‘‘neighborhoods’’ 
are less clear. In the context of this concern around the
neighborhood boundaries, de<U+FB01>ning the neighborhood as a unit of
empirical analysis can present a methodical challenge (Moudon
et al., 2006).
In this paper, built environment characteristics were measured
within six different geographies, and two different scale and zoning 
schemes (Fig. 1 and Table 1). The <U+FB01>rst scheme involved measuring 
the built environment within various buffer distances around a
child’s home and school locations (four buffer distances- 250 m,
400 m, 800 m and 1000 m). In the second approach, neighborhoods
were de<U+FB01>ned using either the census boundary (dissemination area
– DA) or traf<U+FB01>c analysis zone (TAZ) within which a home or school
was located. Selection of these spatial units was informed by the
existing AST literature. The BE–AST associations were examined
at each level of geography, and were compared across different

scales/zoning systems. Environmental characteristics were measured 
at both the residence and school ends of a school trip. The
individual environmental variables that were analyzed are listed
in Table 2, where the hypothesized relationship with AST is also
reported.
Minimum travel distance between home and school locations
of a child was computed using Toronto’s street network <U+FB01>le
(DMTI CanMapÓ RouteLogistics <U+FB01>le, version 2007.3). Other neighborhood 
characteristics related to street network design were also
obtained from the DMTI data. The employment-to-population ratio 
(EMP_POP) was calculated using the TTS data, based on the
number of work-trip ends in each TAZ. TTS trip data were also
used to calculate the density of walking trips (WALK_DSTY) near
the home and school locations. To calculate block density, the
geographical boundary <U+FB01>les from the 2006 population census of
Canada were used. This study situates school travel behavior
within a social–ecological framework. Within this theoretical approach, 
the potential in<U+FB02>uence of neighborhood socio-economic
status was examined. LOWINCOME was, thus, conceptualized as
an environmental characteristic. In other words, socio-economic
status was measured at the neighborhood level. The median
household income data from the population census of Canada
were aggregated, within six different geographies around home
and school locations, to identify low income neighborhoods. Income 
data for individuals or households were not available for
analysis. Lastly, data on pedestrian and cyclist collisions occurred
during the 2002–2006 period were collected from City of Toronto’s 
Transportation Department; the data included the locations
of all fatal and non-fatal collisions reported to the Toronto Police
Service.

2.3. Statistical analysis

Binomial logistic regression was used to explore the correlates
of active versus passive mode choice for school trips (Pampel,
2000). A coef<U+FB01>cient (b    ^i ) from the multivariate logistic regression
models in this paper represent the un-confounded (i.e., adjusted)

correlation between an individual built environment metric and                                  
the log-odds of walking/cycling to school. The odds ratio or OR                                 
(i.e., expb  ^i ), thus, demonstrates the relationship between a variable                       
i and the odds of active travel (i.e., the change in the odds of an active 
mode choice in response to a unit change in the value of variable i). 
Separate binomial logistic regression models were                                         
speci<U+FB01>ed with built environment variables and neighborhood income 
measured within each of the six spatial units outlined in Table 1. 
Researchers have argued that beyond a distance of 5 km (i.e.,                            
a 1-h walk for a child), the choice set may become restricted to                                
motorized alternatives only (Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald,                                      

2008a). For this reason, only children living within 5 km (shortest
path network distance) from their schools were considered for
modeling purposes (92% of all school trips by this age group).
Adjusting for missing data and outliers, the <U+FB01>nal dataset included
2190 home-to-school trips.
For each school trip, <U+FB01>ve socio-demographic variables, and ten
neighborhood characteristics, in addition to the shortest path network 
distance between home and school locations, were initially
measured (Table 2). Prior to the multivariate (i.e., adjusted) logistic
regression estimation, a set of unadjusted logistic regressions (i.e.,
one model per correlate) were estimated to <U+FB01>lter the initial set of

independent variables down to only those variables holding a statistical 
signi<U+FB01>cance at p 6 0.05.
The degree of multi-collinearity across the built environment
variables was also examined, for each level of spatial aggregation
(Lee and Moudon, 2006; Mitra et al., 2010). The correlation between 
variables increased with the scale of spatial analysis. When
two variables were correlated (i.e., DEADEND_DTY and FOUR-WAY_DTY; 
BLOCK_DTY and LOCAL_RD_DTY), those two were entered 
into the multivariate (i.e., adjusted) model one at a time,
and the one with a weaker association (i.e., DEADEND_DTY; LOCAL_RD_DTY) 
was excluded from the <U+FB01>nal model speci<U+FB01>cation.
The built environment variables around the residence and near
the school were also highly correlated. To overcome this collinearity 
problem, two sets of multivariate regression models were speci<U+FB01>ed 
and estimated for each spatial unit, one for built environment
measures near the residence, and the other for the built environment 
near the school. A total of 12 multivariate logistic regression
models of active travel to school were estimated. Statistical analyses 
were performed with RÓ version 2.9.0 (The R Foundation for
Statistical Computing).
The presence of scale effects was examined by observing
whether or not the coef<U+FB01>cient of a variable remained statistically
signi<U+FB01>cant across different scales of aggregation, and to a lesser extent, 
by assessing changes in the size and sign of the coef<U+FB01>cient values 
across different scales of spatial aggregation, within each
aggregation scheme (i.e., buffers or zones). The presence of potential 
zoning effects was examined by using the method suggested by
Fotheringham and Wong (1991) and Zhang and Kukadia (2005),
which involved an assessment of the built environment coef<U+FB01>cients 
across two spatial units at a comparable scale, between
the two zoning schemes (i.e., 250 m buffer versus DA, and 800 m
buffer versus TAZ). The standard-difference-of-means test [1]
was used to test the statistical difference in the estimated coef<U+FB01>cients 
obtained from the logistic regression models:

3. Results

Home-to-school trips by 11–12 year old children (n = 2190),
and the associated socio-demographic and environmental attributes, 
were analyzed. Table 3 describes these attributes; summary
of the built environment measures are presented for each of the six
geographical units, around home and school locations, of all 11–
12 year old children. Results from the multivariate logistic regression 
models are presented in Tables 4 and 5. Most children used an
active mode for school transportation (58%); only 42% traveled to
school using passive modes (Table 3). The average school travel
distance (shortest path network distance) for these students was
1.25 km.

3.1. Scale effect

Table 3 suggested that the variance (square of the standard
deviation) of these environmental variables typically decreased
with an increase in neighborhood size. This type of ‘‘data smoothing’’ 
at larger geographies is not unexpected (Zhang and Kukadia,
2005), and adds empirical evidence in support of the hypothesis
of decreasing sample variance with an increase in the scale of analysis, 
as previously mentioned in the introduction (Section 1). Scale
effects were explored further using the results from the adjusted
logistic regression models, presented in Tables 4 and 5.
The goodness of <U+FB01>t for the estimated models was very similar
across all six speci<U+FB01>cations (although a general trend of a weaker

model <U+FB01>t with increased neighborhood size is noticeable), but the                            
individual coef<U+FB01>cients related to the neighborhood environment                               
characteristics were inconsistent. The signs of observed associations 
changed for some variables across spatial unit speci<U+FB01>cations.                          
For example, for the models estimated with the environmental                                 
variables measured within a 250 m buffer of residence and school                             
locations (hereafter called the 250 m models), both MAJOR_RD_DTY 
and LOWINCOME near the home location were negatively 
associated with AST. But, when these measures were                                    
aggregated at the scale of a 400 m buffer (i.e., 400 m models), positive 
correlations were observed for both variables. However,                                   
signs of the statistically signi<U+FB01>cant environmental variables remained 
largely unchanged by adjustments in the scale of geographic 
aggregation. In contrast, the statistical signi<U+FB01>cance and                            
the size of the coef<U+FB01>cients varied noticeably across different scales                        
of analysis (Tables 4 and 5). In other words, the impact of each variable 
on AST odds was inconsistent across scales of analysis. The                            
largest number of environmental associations with active travel                              
mode choice (3 coef<U+FB01>cients at p 6 0.05; combined from homeend 
and school-end models) was found for the 400 m models                                    
and the DA models. At larger scales (i.e., 800 m models, 1000 m                              
models, TAZ models), fewer environmental characteristics were                                
shown to associate with the odds of taking active transportation.                            
Fig. 2 summarizes the variation in the statistically signi<U+FB01>cant                         
built environment coef<U+FB01>cient values across different neighborhood                            
de<U+FB01>nitions. The purpose of this <U+FB01>gure was to examine the difference 
in the coef<U+FB01>cient size of a variable, across the scales of measurement. 
Although LOWINCOME was conceptualized in this                                      
study as a neighborhood attribute, Fig. 2 focuses speci<U+FB01>cally on
neighborhood design characteristics, and compares estimated                                  
coef<U+FB01>cients for four built environment measures only. None of
the built environment variables were associated (at p 6 0.05) with                               
AST at the scales of 800 m and 1000 m; these two spatial units                               
were therefore not included in this <U+FB01>gure. Fig. 2 indicated the presence 
of scale effects in all built environment measures except MAJOR_RD_DTY, 
which was not a statistically signi<U+FB01>cant predictor of                            
AST at any scale/zone system. Among the three other variables,                               
only FOURWAY_DTY near the school location remained statistically 
signi<U+FB01>cant in both 250 m and 400 m models. No other built
environment measures were signi<U+FB01>cant (or not-signi<U+FB01>cant) at
p 6 0.05 consistently across all scales of geographical aggregation,
within each zoning scheme. In addition, the coef<U+FB01>cient values
clearly changed between geographical units of analysis. The <U+FB01>gure
also demonstrated that there was no obvious trend in how the
coef<U+FB01>cient values changed with geographical scale.

3.2. Zoning effect

The spatial data aggregation methods tested in this study demonstrated 
some zoning effects. Both the statistical signi<U+FB01>cance and
size of the built environment variables changed, somewhat inconsistently, 
across different zoning schemes at a comparable scale
(e.g., 250 m buffer versus DA) (Tables 4 and 5). In order to examine
the potential zoning effects in further detail, the built environment
coef<U+FB01>cients across spatial units at a similar scale were compared
using the standard-difference-in-means test [1]. The estimated
coef<U+FB01>cients from the 250 m models were compared with the coef<U+FB01>cients 
from the DA models, and the coef<U+FB01>cient values from the
800 m models were compared with the values obtained from the
TAZ models. The results are presented in Table 6. The estimated
coef<U+FB01>cients of half of the built environment variables statistically
varied between the two aggregation schemes. No particular pattern, 
however, was present in the observed variation in coef<U+FB01>cient
estimates. The statistical signi<U+FB01>cance, size and direction of the BE–
AST association varied inconsistently between the buffers and census 
boundaries at different scales.

3.3. Correlates of AST

All estimated models included the same variables, but the environmental 
measures were aggregated based on a different neighborhood 
construct for each set of models. Tables 4 and 5
indicated that male students were more likely to use an active travel 
mode for trips to school. A household’s access to private automobiles 
was negatively associated with AST. Children were also
more likely to walk/cycle to school if they lived close to their

schools. The density of walking trips near both home and school                               
locations were associated with AST; a child was more likely to                                
walk/cycle to school in places where other people also walked.                                
The correlation between AST and the neighborhood environment 
varied across the estimated models. Block density within                                 
400 m of a child’s home, and in the DA of a child’s residence and                             
school locations, were positively associated with the odds of AST
participation (demonstrated by OR > 1, in Tables 4 and 5). Higher
density of four-way intersections (i.e., the proportion of total street                       
intersections that are four-way) within 250 m and 400 m of the
school location reduced the odds of active versus passive travel.                                
The abundance of signalized intersections close to home (i.e., within 
250 m buffer distance), and within the TAZ of school increased                             
the odds of AST. Children attending schools located in low-income                             
neighborhoods (measured using a 400 m or 1000 m buffer, and                                   

within the DA of a school) were more likely to actively travel to
school than others; socio-economic status of the home neighborhood 
was not statistically associated with walking/cycling. Land
use mix (i.e., employment-to-population ratio) and the density of
major roads near the residence or school were also not associated
with mode choice.

4. Discussion and conclusions

This research is the <U+FB01>rst to explore the potential impact of the
MAUP, more speci<U+FB01>cally, the presence of scale and/or zoning effects 
in the measurement of the neighborhood environment, on
an observed association between built environment characteristics
and AST. Objective measures of built environment characteristics

were estimated for six different spatial units and entered into six
sets of logistic regression models of school travel mode choice
for trips to school. Only small variation in model <U+FB01>t was observed
across different geographical representations, which is not surprising 
given that the objectively measured built environment was
only moderately associated with AST. If the MAUP did not exist
across different geographical aggregation schemes, there would
also be little variation in the coef<U+FB01>cients of the built environment
variables among the estimated models (Fotheringham and Wong,
1991). Instead, the results indicated that the statistical signi<U+FB01>cance,
size, and in a few cases, the direction (i.e., the sign) of the built
environment coef<U+FB01>cients changed with a change in the scale for
spatial data aggregation. Statistically signi<U+FB01>cant differences in
regression coef<U+FB01>cients across different zoning schemes suggested
the presence of zoning effects.
While these results were suggestive of the presence of the
MAUP (i.e., scale and zoning effects) in statistical analysis of the
BE–AST relationship, they were not prescriptive. The statistically
signi<U+FB01>cant environmental coef<U+FB01>cients were not uniformly at their
largest value at any particular scale/zone system. A statistically
consistent/reliable spatial unit speci<U+FB01>cation for the study of school
travel behavior therefore may not exist, as different environmental
factors may operate on the mode choice process at different scales.
In general, for the City of Toronto, more built environment characteristics 
were associated with mode choice when these environmental 
measures were generalized to a 400 m buffer around
home and school locations, compared to buffers at other scales,
and spatial units taken from census or the TTS (i.e., producing different 
zoning effects).
Implicit to this and other studies that attempt to quantify relationships 
between local built environments and mode choice is the
assumption that the decision maker has complete and directionally
invariant environmental information around the origin, destination, 
and/or the travel route (e.g., the built environment within a
buffer distance or within a census boundary) (Lee and Moudon
2004; Schlossberg et al., 2006). In reality, perhaps, an individual’s
sense of place is more heavily in<U+FB02>uenced by the places he/she actually 
possesses some knowledge about (i.e., the action space) or
experiences directly (i.e., the activity space) within a neighborhood, 
city, or region (Horton and Reynolds, 1971). The way in
which space and place are conceptualized in this study and others
like it, packaged as abstract and modi<U+FB01>able digital geographies
containing objectively measured data about the environment,
might evolve through additional engagement with the theoretical
and empirical studies of behavioral geography and more recent research 
situated within a similar framework (Buliung and Kanaroglou 
2006; Horton and Reynolds 1971).
With regard to the environmental correlates of AST, the school
transportation literature conceptualizes proximity to school and
safety as two major domains through which the built environment
in<U+FB02>uences walking/cycling (McMillan, 2005; Mitra, 2011). Similar
to previous research (e.g., Ewing et al., 2004; McDonald, 2008a;
Mitra et al., 2010), this paper indicates that school travel distance,
and thus, longer walk/cycle travel time, was an important factor in
mode choice for school transportation. Grade 5 students who travel 
1 mi (translated as 1.5 or 1.6 km straight line distance) or more
are eligible for the school bus service offered by Toronto’s public
and catholic school boards, which may also reduce the propensity
of active traveling to school beyond that distance. This consistent
<U+FB01>nding is particularly important in the context of the economic
rationalization of public school systems that is currently underway
in the US and Canada (Basu, 2007; Schlossberg et al., 2006). Smaller
neighborhood elementary schools are closing and certainly there
has been an emerging conversation within school boards to consider 
closure of neighborhood schools in favor of larger ‘‘economically 
ef<U+FB01>cient’’ alternatives. These larger schools will accommodate

more students, from a larger area, potentially leading to increased
use of the automobile and other passive (or perhaps, less active)
modes such as school buses. The effect of this economic rationalization 
of the supply of schools on school travel behavior should receive 
greater attention in research and policy.
Relating to traf<U+FB01>c and pedestrian safety, the regression results
suggest that signalized intersections (i.e., the proportion of street
intersections that are signal-controlled) were associated with active 
travel to school, probably because of increased safety from
motorized traf<U+FB01>c. A neighborhood with smaller blocks (i.e., with
a higher block density), which is largely representative of an inner-city, 
safe (from traf<U+FB01>c), and walkable environment, was also
associated with AST. This research also found a negative correlation 
between a high proportion of four-way intersections (i.e., representing 
a grid street network) and active travel. A grid-based
street network may encourage adult walk trips by providing increased 
connectivity. But, this type of street network typically represents 
busy urban streets with potentially high traf<U+FB01>c volumes,
which may act as a barrier for active traveling to school.
In addition to the potential effects of street network design,
walking school trips were more common in neighborhoods where
other people walked for work or school travel purposes. A high
walking rate could be facilitated by neighborhood built environment 
characteristics (Ewing and Cervero, 2010; Transportation Research 
Board, 2005). The WALK_DSTY variable was not correlated
with the other environmental measures that were examined, but
it may potentially capture the effects of some built environment
variations that remain unexplored in this study. With regard to
children’s school travel, a neighborhood with high prevalence of
walking can also produce a sense of pedestrian safety, and provide
opportunities to produce and maintain social capital (Leyden,
2003; Mitra et al., 2010). Previous research has found that parents
who valued the importance of a child’s interaction with others
(particularly, with other children) on the way to school were more
likely to let their children actively travel to school (McMillan,
2007; Timperio et al., 2006). In contrast, objectively measured
safety outcomes (i.e., the prevalence of collisions involving pedestrians/ 
cyclists near home or school) were not correlated with the
mode choice decision; similar <U+FB01>ndings have also been reported
elsewhere (Panter et al., 2010).
These results can be encouraging to the planning of a design
based intervention to enable AST among children, such as the ones
undertaken by the Federally funded Safe Routes to School (SRTS)
programs in the US and the community/grass-roots Active and Safe
Routes to School (ASRTS) campaign in Canada (Active and Safe
Routes to School, 2010; National Center for Safe Routes to School,
2007). Particularly in the US, the SAFETEA-LU federal transportation 
legislation in 2005 devoted $612 million to implement the
SRTS programs across the country. The individual SRTS programs
were undertaken between then and 2009, and much of the spending 
was focused on an improvement in the built environment along
school travel routes. Results from this study suggested that the design 
characteristics of a neighborhood that potentially create walkable 
and safe streets, particularly close to home locations, may
increase the odds of active travel among children.
This study has several strengths and limitations. The travel data
were drawn from a large population-based survey of travel behavior. 
Residential and school locations of this large sample were situated 
across a diversely developed urban landscape within the City
of Toronto, which generated signi<U+FB01>cant variation in the built environment 
measures. But, and similar to some other studies (e.g.,
Kerr et al., 2006; Larsen et al., 2009; Panter et al., 2010), travel
modes were generalized into broader ‘‘active’’ and ‘‘passive’’ categories. 
Recent empirical research has emphasized differences in
behavioral processes across individual travel modes, such as between 
driving, using transit, cycling and walking (Ewing et al.,


2004; Lin and Chang, 2010; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008).
While these potential differences are acknowledged, the purpose
of this research was to examine the use of active modes compared
to all other potential options, a topic that is relevant to the understanding 
of the geography of school transportation, and also to urban
planning interventions.
Moreover, this paper purposefully explored AST behavior of 11–
12 year old children only. The adoption of this approach limits the
generalizability of <U+FB01>ndings to children and youth of other age
groups. The school travel mode choice process may indeed be moderated 
by age (Mitra, 2011; Panter et al., 2008). The interaction between 
a child’s cognitive development with age, and a household’s
sense of place, could produce more autonomous travel as a child
ages, and also increase the use of different modes that are eventually 
matched to the growing spatial and social capabilities of aging
children (e.g., taking transit). These ‘‘age effects’’ are not well
understood, and remain an important area for empirical, policybased 
research.
Despite these limitations, this study makes an important contribution 
by advancing the current approach to understanding
school travel behavior through quantitative analysis. Importantly,
this paper attempts to inform the emerging AST literature of the
role of geography, or arbitrary geographies, on the modeling and
understanding of children’s school travel behavior, an issue that
has not received adequate attention in the literature. This study
addressed the potential measurement errors due to MAUP, and
reported the BE–AST associations for six neighborhood representations. 
The results are suggestive of the presence of some scale
and zoning effects, evidence that supports the primary hypothesis
of this article that the MAUP may partly explain the inconsistency
in empirical <U+FB01>ndings of the existing AST literature. Having not addressed 
the MAUP issue adequately, studies that use a single geographical 
representation of the neighborhood construct may
produce misleading results. Future research can bene<U+FB01>t from following 
a similar procedure applied in this study for assessing potential 
ecological uncertainty, and may report estimation results
at different levels of geographical aggregation. As suggested by
others (Zhang and Kukadia, 2005), a strong behavioral justi<U+FB01>cation 
for the selection of spatial units, which takes into account
the interaction between human behavior and the surrounding
physical environment, may also be a useful approach to consider.
