Built Environment and School Travel
Mode Choice in Toronto, Canada

Walking to or from school may provide a regular source of physical
activity for children and youth. To improve walking practices among this
younger population, urban planners emphasize the importance of built
environment interventions. Empirical understanding of the potential
relationship between the built environment and active school transportation 
(e.g., walking) is therefore essential to the development of effective
planning interventions. In the nexus of empiricism and policy, place-based
differences in school transport policy and urbanization processes, which
may associate with mode choice, provide the rationale for conducting
local research to support local policy development. This study examines
the association between the built environment and the likelihood of
walking or being driven to or from school. The research also addresses
differences in mode choice behavior across morning and afternoon school
trips. Binomial logit models were specified to study the school travel
outcomes of children aged 11 to 13 years in the city of Toronto, Canada.
Distance between the residence and school had the strongest correlation
with mode choice; other built environment measures had moderate associations 
with walking. Importantly, the built environment around a child’s
residence had a stronger association with mode choice than did the built
environment around the school. Furthermore, the effect of the built
environment was more apparent for home-to-school trips. This research
provides evidence that the built environment may influence school travel
mode choice, but planners and community-based organizations should
exercise caution when the nature of interventions required to encourage
walking among children is determined.

(7, 9). Public health and planning interventions tailored to promote
the use of active transportation at an earlier stage of childhood development 
could provide a mechanism to encourage lifelong patterns
of active mobility, acting as a preventive force against the rising tide
of overweight and obesity in children and youth.
Urban land use and transport planners have responded to this policy
debate by occasionally questioning, and in some cases accepting as
conventional wisdom, that the built environment directly influences
travel decisions. In the United States, for example, the Safe Routes
to School (SR2S) program advocates improving the built environment 
along school routes and enhancing pedestrian and bicycle
facilities (10). More recently, the draft Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design for Neighborhood Development rating system 
requires that compact and mixed-use neighborhoods be located
close to schools to promote walking among children (11). In Canada,
the Ontario Professional Planners Institute has argued that the practice 
of transport and land use planning should place the needs of
children on a par with the needs of other demographic cohorts and
businesses (2, 12). This emerging child- and youth-friendly turn in
planning practice has arguably occurred in advance of conclusive
and generalizable knowledge about the relationship between children,
youth, the built environment, and travel demand (13).
The research described here explores school transportation in the
city of Toronto, Canada, and contributes to the emerging school
transport literature by examining two research questions:
• What is the association between the built environment and a
child’s likelihood of walking or being driven to or from school?
• Are there any differences in what and how built environment
characteristics correlate with school travel mode choice across
morning (home-to-school) and afternoon (school-to-home) trips?

The majority of school travel studies examine trips to school
(13–16). Drawing a distinction between morning and afternoon
school travel (i.e., trips to and from school) and attempting to expose
the differential effects of school travel correlates across the two time
periods are important, given consistent reports of more walking from
school to home in the afternoon (17–19). The diagnosis of differential
effects across time suggests that planning interventions could produce
unintended results at different points in time.
This research will advance the understanding of the relationship

between the built environment and school travel mode choice and

will also provide critically important, policy-relevant data on school
travel in the Canadian context. This last issue is important on two
fronts: first, the work represents the beginning of a process aimed at
looking at school travel through a comparative lens, with a view to


assessing the generalizability of findings from school travel studies
conducted in the United States; and second, this research begins to
develop domestic knowledge on the subject of school travel to inform


policy development in the city of Toronto. Findings from this study                    
could assist urban planners, health practitioners, and community-based                 
organizations who are interested in developing and understanding                       
the efficacy of built environment interventions intended to encourage                  
active school travel.                                                                  
											
											
SCHOOL TRAVEL AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT                                                
											
School location has played a central role in the conceptualization of                  
planned neighborhoods in the United States since the 1920s and in                      
Canada beginning with the neighborhood plans of the World War II                       
years, which would later be followed by the corporate suburbs of the                   
postwar era (20, 21). Close proximity between the school and resdential 
locations and safety from motorized traffic are two conceptual                 
properties of the planned neighborhood that may have implications for                  
a child’s mobility and mode choice within a neighborhood. Empirical
studies of school travel mode choice have often reported distance and
travel cost to be the most important correlates of a child’s mode for                  
school transportation (14–16, 19, 22–24). Findings appear to be mixed
about the influence of street connectivity and traffic safety on mode                  
choice. Some researchers have reported walking to be positively                        
associated with the availability of sidewalks (15, 25), intersection                   
density (19), and parental attitudes toward safety (13, 23, 25), whereas               
others have found evidence to the contrary (13, 18).                                   
With regard to other built environment characteristics, some                        
studies indicated that walking is more likely among children living                    
in dense (16, 24), mixed-use (13, 18) and street-oriented neighborhoods 
(i.e., houses with street-facing windows) (13); others found                     

few links between the built environment and children’s mobility
(15, 18, 24). It is conceivable that dense, mixed-use, pedestrianfriendly 
environments influence adult walking for discretionary
trips by providing more destinations close by (i.e., an increase in
accessibility), reduce overall travel distance, and make the pedestrian
trip psychologically more attractive. But given that both the school
location and school travel routes are relatively fixed, it remains less
clear how the built environment may enable school-related walking.
School transportation research requires the development of a theoretical 
foundation that is not entirely bound up in what is known
about the travel behavior of adults. On the basis of current empirical 
evidence and informed somewhat by theoretical research on both
adults’ and children’s travel (13, 26), five conceptual domains were
identified to articulate the ways in which the built environment may
moderate the decision to take an active mode (i.e., walking) to and
from school (Table 1).

STUDY DESIGN

The purpose of this research is to explore the association between
the built environment and a child’s likelihood of walking or being
driven to or from school. The general hypothesis is that after household 
and personal characteristics are controlled for, the built environment 
remains an important contributing factor in determining
whether a child is walking or being driven on the way to school or
on his or her way home. Failure to reject this hypothesis could provide
some evidence that planning interventions into the built environment
may increase walking among children and youth.

The city of Toronto was chosen as the study area because of the
variability it offers in terms of neighborhoods, which are often
identified in both the popular and academic literature as offering
built environments that either enable or restrict the use of active

transportation for school or other activities. Toronto’s urban, innersuburban, 
and suburban places have developed alongside the rise of
professional planning in Canada and capture some of the nation’s
earliest experiments with the planned built form (21). The pre-1998
city limits include what are typically considered traditional neighborhoods 
with retail and employment-related land uses located along
main streets. A series of near and complete political amalgamations
since 1998 brought a mix of modernist suburban neighborhoods into
expanded city limits. As a result, residential communities in Toronto
now range from compact mixed-use neighborhoods, to single-use
high-rise communities, to postwar suburban-style developments.
Within Toronto’s diverse built environment, the major school
boards (Toronto District School Board and Toronto Catholic District 
School Board) maintain small school catchment areas; 80% of
children 11 to 13 years of age travel less than 3 km (1.86 mi) for school
(each way, straight-line distance) (29). Since most students live within
walking distance of their schools, the diversity of Toronto’s residential 
environment offers an excellent opportunity to explore the
influence of the built environment on children’s school travel.

Data

School travel data were taken from the 2001 Transportation Tomorrow
Survey (TTS), which is a repeated cross-sectional survey of travel
behavior conducted in Southern Ontario, Canada, and includes data
for the city of Toronto. The 2001 TTS surveyed 5% of the households
in the study area. A computer-assisted telephone interview procedure
was applied to collect household travel data (e.g., origin and destination 
of trips, trip start time, purpose, primary mode of transportation)
for a randomly selected weekday in the fall or spring of the year
(29, 30). All trips by household members aged 11 years and older
associated with the day before the interview were proxy-reported by
an adult household member. The survey did not ask for self-reported
trip distances. Rather, straight-line distance between each origin and
destination was calculated and is reported in kilometers.
The existing literature on children’s school travel patterns in the
Greater Toronto Area showed that when compared with older youth,
11- to 13-year-olds tend to walk more for school trips. As a result, this
study explored mode choice for children aged 11 to 13 years (17).

With respect to school travel, the home-to-school trips (the time
interval 0600 to 0929 h included 99.5% of the morning trips) and
school-to-home trips (the time interval 1400 to 0629 h included
96.5% of the afternoon trips) were extracted from the 2001 TTS
data separately, with information on the school travel modes, trip
distance, and sociodemographic descriptors for children and their
households. The initial data set included 4,009 home-to-school
trips and 4,000 school-to-home trips by 3,767 households. Fewer
trips were reported in the afternoon period; possible reasons for this
discrepancy can include reporting error, the absence of trips during
the sampled time interval, or trips made by children elsewhere after
school rather than returning directly home.
The 2001 TTS provided some demographic information on the
households producing the school trips; variables such as age, sex,
number of children in the household, vehicles per licensed driver,
and employment status were available (Table 2). Household income
data are not included as part of the survey (31). Although this limitation 
is acknowledged, perhaps the potential effect of a household’s

economic status on school travel modes is indirect, through employment 
composition of the household and access to vehicles, which
were explored in this research. In addition, the overall income composition 
of the census dissemination area (DA) of a child’s residence
and school location was included in the analysis. Beyond the expected
demographic effects, empirical studies of school travel suggest that
the built environment near the household (18, 25), near the school
(13, 18), and along the travel route (19) associate with walking mode
choice. In this research, and similar to that by Ewing et al. (15) and
Larsen et al. (18), built environment characteristics were explored
at the residence and school ends of the trip (Table 2). Each built
environment variable can be linked with one or more of the five

conceptual domains of the built environment described in Table 1.
Although the social capital concept was not measured directly, the
variables DIST_CBD and WALK_DSTY represent the availability
(or absence) of environments that may enable the production or
maintenance of social capital.
Land use mix around the residence and school was derived by using
TTS data on the number of work-trip ends in each traffic analysis
zone (TAZ). Within the city of Toronto, the mean size of a TAZ is
1.31 km2 (0.51 mi2) with a standard deviation of 0.94 km2 (0.36 mi2).
The TAZs are typically smaller than the city’s designated neighborhood 
boundaries. Each neighborhood, on average, includes three
TAZs, with some variation (X = 3.44 zones, SD = 2.33 zones). TTS
trip data were used to calculate the total number of daily work- and
school-related trips taken by all residents living in a TAZ. For each
TAZ, distance to Toronto’s central business district (CBD) was
calculated by using Toronto’s street network file, obtained from the
DMTI Spatial, Inc. CanMap Route Logistics Subset 6.2 (2002).
In acknowledgment of Toronto’s diverse socioeconomic landscape,
aggregated household income was studied at a smaller geographic
scale than the TAZ; median household income at the scale of census
DA was obtained from the 2001 population census of Canada. Street
network characteristics (i.e., intersection density, number of street
blocks) were measured within a 400-m (0.25-mi) straight-line radius

around a child’s home and school location. Assuming an average
walking speed of 5 km/h (3 mph) (15, 32), the 400-m radius is equivalent 
to a 5-min walking distance around a child’s residence or the
school. To calculate intersection density, the DMTI CanMap
Route Logistics file was used. Using data for urban blocks taken from
the 2001 population census of Canada, block density was estimated
within a 400-m radial distance of each child’s home and school
location.

Model Specification

A binomial logit modeling approach was used to comparatively
explore the correlates of walking versus driving from home to school
in the morning (0600 to 0929 h) and then walking versus driving
from school to home in the afternoon (1400 to 1829 h). Although
the unobserved effects of walking and cycling modes could be correlated, 
cycling constitutes only 1.3% of all school trips in Toronto
by 11- to 13-year-old children (17), and therefore excluding cycling
is expected to have little impact on the model results. Furthermore,
the purpose of this research is to draw a comparison across transportation 
modes that are typically the focus of the debate on children’s
active commuting to school and physical activity. This study did not
examine other modes available to children and youth, such as the
school bus and public transit. Like other empirical research (13),
the intention here is to begin in an exploratory rather than predictive
mode of inquiry, with a view to exposing the differential effects of
the built environment on walking or driving for school travel at
different times of day.
Within the adopted econometric modeling framework, a household 
is assumed to select the mode that maximizes net benefits to
themselves when faced with a known set of alternative modes for
school transportation (33, 34). Given a choice between different
feasible modes, the utility function Unj for a particular mode j and
child n takes the following form:

Vnj, then, is the observed utility of mode j to a child n, which is
specified here as the sum of components related to distance, the built
environment, and the sociodemographic characteristics. Assuming
that the error term <U+2440>nj is independently and identically distributed (iid)
across choice alternatives and households, the probability that a
child n chooses mode j from an observed set of alternatives can be
expressed by the following equation:

where J is the known choice set for, in this case, a school trip and
includes only two alternatives l, walking or being driven in a
private automobile (by household adults or in a neighborhood
carpool). In future work, the choice set will be broadened to consider
multioccupant modes such as the school bus and public transit.

Model Estimation

Informed by the school transport literature (15,16), this research
assumed that beyond a distance of 5 km (i.e., a 1-h walk for a
child), the choice set becomes restricted to motorized transport
only. Therefore, only children living within 5 km (3 mi) from their
school were considered for modeling purposes. The same set of
households was included for both morning and afternoon school
travel to explore potential temporal differences in the association
between mode choice and its correlates. After adjustment for missing
data and outliers, the final data set included 2,729 home-to-school
trips (nwalk = 1,922 and ncar = 807) and 2,712 school-to-home trips
(nwalk = 1,901 and ncar = 811).
As discussed earlier, 6 sociodemographic variables and 10 built
environment characteristics around each home and school location
were initially measured for every school trip (Table 2). Following
Lee and Moudon (35), the variables were filtered by using a twostage 
screening process before multivariate logit estimation. In the
first stage, the degree of correlation between each of these potential
explanatory variables and the likelihood of walking was tested with
bivariate logistic regression (Table 3); only those variables holding
a statistical significance of p = .1 and showing the expected sign
were included in the next step of the modeling process.
Three out of six sociodemographic variables and most built environment 
variables had some correlation with mode choice. However,
the directions of the observed relationships were, in some cases,
contrary to initial expectations. For example, the number of children
in the household (i.e., presence of siblings) was initially expected to
positively associate with walking school trips, since this situation
likely enables siblings to walk to and from school together. But the

bivariate regression demonstrated the opposite result. Although
unexpected, this finding is not surprising, and at least one other North
American study has found similar results (22). Perhaps the finding
reflects the contemporary Western culture of idealized motherhood,
in which there is less recognition and trust for the capability of siblings
as caregivers (e.g., travel companions) to their younger brothers and
sisters (36). In a household with more than one child, driving instead
of walking to and from school may also be the preferred option for
parents from the perspective of value of time and convenience,
particularly when children attend different schools.
With respect to street design, although the density of four-way
local street intersections (LOCAL) was initially expected to associate
with more walking, a negative correlation was observed. This result
Transportation Research Record 2156
hics, the Built Environment,

could suggest that the reduced traffic safety imposed by more street
crossings is more important in the mode choice decision than the
improvements in connectivity that they offer. In contrast, intersection
density of major streets (MAJOR) was positively associated with
the likelihood of walking, contrary to the initial expectation of a
negative correlation. Many of the larger intersections (i.e., four-way
intersections of major streets) are likely signalized, offering a sense
of safety that may encourage walking. Although such a hypothesis
may partly explain the observed correlation, overall, this positive
bivariate association was counterintuitive, and for this reason, the
variable MAJOR was removed from further analysis.
The second stage of the filtering process involved an examination
of multicollinearity across variables. Since most of the sampled

students live close to their schools, the built environment variables                      
around the residence and near the school were highly correlated                            
(r = 0.70 in most cases). To date, the spatial correlation of the built                       
environment variables between the school and home trip ends has                            
received little attention in the literature. Ewing et al. (15) considered                  
the average built environment across the school and home locations.                        
Lee and Moudon (35) dealt with the issue more explicitly, but in the                       
context of adult walking. In this study, to overcome the collinearity                      
problem, separate models were specified and estimated, one for the                         
built environment variables around the residence and the other for                         
the school. The correlation between built environment variables at                         
the home or school end was weaker than was the case when no                                
variable distinction was made by location. The only exception was
the TAZ population density (POP_DSTY), which, for both the residence 
and school, was strongly associated (r > 0.85) with walking                         
density (WALK_DSTY). Population density is often used in urban
form–transportation research as an omnibus indicator of the combined 
effect of access and land use mix; these more specific built                         
environment characteristics were included in this analysis as independent 
variables (Table 2). As a result, POP_DSTY was excluded
in the final model specification.
In the end, two sets of binomial logit models were estimated to
explore the effects of the built environment on the choice between
walking and being driven. The first set of models examined a child’s
morning period (0600 to 0929 h) home-to-school trips, and the second
set explored mode choice for the afternoon period (1400 to 1829 h)
school-to-home trips. Within each time period, models were also estimated 
separately to examine home and school-end effects. The private
automobile was used as the reference mode, and the unconfounded
influence of each of the sociodemographic and built environment
variables on the odds of walking over driving is reported.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The logistic regression results are summarized in Tables 4 and 5. The
convergence of the models was satisfactory; adding built environment
variables to an initially specified model with only sociodemographic

variables and distance to school (not reported) improved the overall
model fit. The results indicated some association between the built
environment around both home and school and a child’s likelihood
of walking to and from school; the built environment near the location
of residence was more strongly correlated with mode choice than the
built environment around the school. The association between the
built environment and mode choice also appeared to be stronger for
morning trips; fewer built environment variables were associated
with walking in the afternoon period.
As expected, the distance between the residence and school
location emerged as the most important factor to explain walking as
a mode choice for school transportation; a 1-km (0.62-mi) decrease in
travel distance increased the odds of walking by 0.71 to 0.72 times
(Tables 4 and 5). This observation is particularly important given
that since 1999, more than 200 schools were closed in the province
of Ontario, Canada (37). In the city of Toronto, 16 public schools
were affected by this provincewide restructuring policy, and there is
strong indication that additional neighborhood schools will be closed

in the near term (37 ). In the United States, a similar trend has been
observed during the past decades (19). Fewer in number, elementary
schools now draw students from larger areas, reducing the proximity
between a child’s home and school location and likely discouraging
walking. The potential impact of the economic rationalization of the
school system on mode choice and children’s physical activity levels
should be the focus of some debate when governments and school
boards contemplate school closures.
Some have argued that the neighborhoods around schools (particularly 
new schools) should be planned with connected streets and an
adequate supply of local roads (19). The data from this study suggest
that some caution should be exercised before the wholesale widespread 
adoption of such planning and engineering practices. The
model results indicated that beyond proximity, the independent
effects of other built environment variables—those related to street
connectivity—on mode choice were at best moderate. Density of local
street intersections was uncorrelated with the choice of walking
among children, whereas higher block density (i.e., smaller blocks)

around a child’s residence appeared to encourage walking only for
trips to school in the morning.
At least two previous studies reported a correlation between
land use mix around the school location and walking among children 
(13, 18). Findings from this research indicated that sales- and
service-related land use near the home or around the school location
was not associated with mode choice for school transportation.
Children living in TAZs that were overwhelmed by manufacturing,
trade, office, and professional employment (i.e., an employment-to-population 
ratio > 1.5) did not have significantly different mode choice
behavior than those living in TAZs with minimum employment-related 
land use (i.e., an employment-to-population ratio < 0.5). But
a moderate balance between manufacturing, trade, office, and professional 
employment and residential population (i.e., an employment-to-population
 ratio between 0.5 to 1.5) in the TAZ of a child’s
residence reduced the likelihood of walking for both morning and
afternoon period school trips; having these types of jobs concentrated 
about the school had a negative association with walking for
home-to-school trips.
These findings begin to emphasize the potential differential effects
of land use type on children’s mobility, particularly for school transportation. 
It appears that manufacturing, trade, office, and professional
employment-related land uses may have a more pronounced effect
on a child’s travel mode than retail- or service-related land uses. The
observed negative association between land use mix and walking is
not surprising either, and it perhaps indicates that, unlike the case for
adults, for whom land use mix may improve access and pedestrian
comfort, a child’s mode choice for school trips is determined by
concerns about traffic and a child’s personal safety near employment
locations. Future empirical research will need to consider the design,
intensity, or quality of the land use mix (e.g., street orientation,
access, building height, type of employment). This additional work
may provide a more conclusive explanation for the observed relationship 
between the presence and composition of such land uses in the
neighborhood and the mode choice for school commuting.
As expected, the regression results showed that a child was more
likely to walk to or from school in places where other people walked
(i.e., the rate of walking per square kilometer area was higher than
elsewhere in the study area). Walking was also found to be more
common among children living in low-income areas (i.e., in DAs with
low median household income) and among those children attending
schools located in such areas. The result was indicative only of a
potential negative association between DA-level socioeconomic
composition and walking to and from school but does not necessarily
imply that walking was less common among children from highincome 
households. McDonald (38) reported similar results based
on an analysis of the 2001 U.S. National Household Travel Survey;
children and youth living in disadvantaged neighborhoods were more
likely to walk to school. The potential causal relationship between
neighborhood socioeconomic status and walking among children,
however, remains an area to be explored through further research.
The model results also demonstrated a negative association between
the variable for block density–distance-to-CBD interaction and
walking. This finding suggests that a child living in a neighborhood
with smaller blocks and located far from the CBD would be less likely
to walk than someone living in a place with larger blocks but located
closer to the CBD. Although the marginal effect on mode choice of
this interaction between urban design and location is relatively small
(odds ratio = 0.99), the result suggests, for example, that suburban
places in the study area that either possess neotraditional design elements 
or, alternatively, were developed at a time when the so-called

neotraditional elements were de rigueur (e.g., during the 19th century)
may not produce walking school trips at a rate comparable with
the study area’s inner-urban neighborhoods.
An important result indicated that the built environment at the home
end of the school trips has a stronger correlation with mode choice,
which implies that built environment interventions at the school end
could be less successful in encouraging walking compared with
interventions closer to home. For example, in Canada, the School
Travel Planning project, a community-based initiative funded by the
Public Health Agency of Canada, advocates built environment interventions 
primarily at the school end to promote active commuting
to school (39). On the basis of the model results, it appears that public 
capital and tax revenues could perhaps be better spent by improving 
infrastructure more equitably across a neighborhood instead of
focusing capital improvement on the school end alone.
Other than the built environment, sociodemographic characteristics
that describe the household and the child explained some of the
variation in mode choice. A child’s sex was not associated with mode
choice, but older children tend to walk more than younger children
for both directions of the school trip. Although other studies have
also reported a correlation between age and school travel (15, 16),
this research found that age-related effects on mode choice were
particularly strong in the afternoon compared with the morning period
trips (Tables 4 and 5). With regard to automobile access, as expected,
the odds of being driven to and from school increased with the ratio
of vehicles to licensed householders. The question remains whether
this household “automobility” is merely a manifestation of affluence
in the context of mobility or reflects some broader association between
the culture of auto-centeredness of a household’s daily activity and
travel practices and the mode used for school travel.
There remain three broad issues requiring further consideration:
self-selection, the trip-based approach of this and other studies, and
geographical transferability. First, households become periodically
involved in longer-term decisions such as residential location choice.
The decision about where to live enables a household with sufficient
income to select itself into a walkable or drivable neighborhood.
This self-selection may in turn facilitate or discourage active school
travel. Although this research conceptualized the potential causal
relationship between built environment variables and walking, it could
not, largely because of data limitations, control for self-selection bias.
Second, this study, and most of the school transport literature,
adopted a trip-based approach; the school trip is studied in isolation,
extracted from broader patterns of daily activities and travel. Although
there are exceptions to this trend (24,40), and although the trip-based
approach holds value because of how it relates to school travel
planning practices (e.g., SR2S in the United States, Active and Safe
Routes to School in Canada), mode choice for school transportation
can conceivably be influenced by a household’s broader activity–
travel interactions. For example, the decision to escort a child to
or from school (and perhaps the use of an automobile for the trip)
may depend on the availability of parents or adult caregivers. This
availability problem, one that may reflect the temporal asymmetry
that typically exists between the school day and the work day, may
be an important aspect of the mode choice process in addition to
built environment influences.
This availability hypothesis is implicitly reflected in the current
estimation results indicating that the built environment does not
have a uniform association with mode choice across the morning
and afternoon periods. Adults who remain at work in the afternoon,
for example, are potentially unavailable for the school trip to home,
which may contribute to temporal differences in mode choice. Being

a trip-based survey, the TTS does not provide direct observation on
caregiver time constraints; the potential influence of such activity–
travel constraints on mode choice could not be examined in this
research. Broader behavioral insights could emerge through a more
regular nesting of children’s mobility within the activity–travel
paradigm, which remains the subject of future work.
Last, the geographical transferability of these findings to other
places in North America requires some careful thought, particularly
given that more than twice as many children in the current sample
walked to or from school than were driven. This finding contrasts with
those from several U.S. studies, in which the automobile emerged
as the dominant travel mode (13, 15, 19). The Toronto case is
more similar to that of the United Kingdom, where, in 2006, 41%
of 11- to 16-year-olds walked to school and 20% were driven (41).
Furthermore, in this study, the ratio of children walking and being
driven was found to be similar between the morning and afternoon
periods, which is also atypical of the broader North American context (17–19). 
This comparative statement could be a sampling effect,
given that previous research by the authors, which studied all TTS
school trips, indicated a 5% increase in walking for 11- to 13-year-olds
for afternoon period school-to-home trips (17). Either way, walking
emerges as the dominant travel mode for school trips in the study
area. Transnational and intercity differences in school travel mode
share further validate the need for the development of a local empirically 
constructed knowledge base about the school travel behavior
of children and youth.

CONCLUSION

This research explored the effect of the built environment on children’s
travel mode choice for journeys to and from school. The main findings
indicate that (a) the built environment explains some variation in
children’s mode choice; (b) other than distance between home and
school, the association between individual built environment variables 
and walking or driving is only moderate; (c) the built environment 
around the residence is a stronger correlate of mode choice
than the built environment around school; and (d) the effect of the
built environment on mode choice is subtly weaker for afternoon
(school-to-home) trips than for morning (home-to-school) trips. Also,
findings from this research suggest that differences may exist between
children and adults in terms of how the built environment affects
mode choice. This study begins to address this research challenge
by taking a child-centered approach to understanding the relationship
between the built environment and school travel. There is potentially
much to be gained by refining this approach to extend the knowledge
base on school transportation, childhood mobility, and physical
activity. Urban planners and community-based organizations who
are interested in improving the built environment to encourage active
mobility (e.g., walking, cycling) among children and youth should
also systematically address these differences when interventions
are designed.


