Active school trips: associations with caregiver walking frequency

Household and parental characteristics and perceptions of walking and the built environment may
reduce the propensity of children to use active travel modes (walking and bicycling) for their school trip.
This paper examines whether there is a relationship between walking or bicycling to school and the
walking habits of caregivers or parents. A statewide pedestrian survey of New Jersey residents was used
to assess the mode taken by children for their school trip (age of respondents (parents) 19–84; n ¼353).
Socio-demographic characteristics, public school density, full and part-time employment status of
respondents, self-reported frequency of walking of adult respondents and perceived neighborhood
environment characteristics are used as independent variables. Logit models are estimated to test
associations between these variables. Non-minority ethnic status, women respondent's employment
type, higher income, and vehicle ownership are negatively associated with active travel to school, while
higher public school density is positively associated with choice of an active travel mode. Even in
favorable circumstances for active travel to school, the employment circumstances of parents or
caregivers may deter children from walking to school. When parents are active, their children are also
more likely to be active. Poor sidewalk quality also deters parents from letting children use active modes
for their school trip.

1. Introduction                                                                              
											
Over the last two decades, there has been growing concern                               
over childhood obesity. As a result, increased attention has been                            
placed on children's physical activity as well as on their ability to                            
travel to school using non-motorized modes (McDonald, 2008a,                                 
2008b, 2008c, McDonald, et al., 2010, McDonald and Aalborg,                                  
2009, Timperio et al., 2006, Schlossberg et al., 2006, Rodriguez,                            
2009, Boarnet et al., 2005). De<U+FB01>ciencies in the built environment,                           
such as lack of adequate sidewalks and unsafe road crossings have                            
been identi<U+FB01>ed as impediments for increasing non-motorized                                   
travel to school (Ewing et al., 2004). Studies have found that                               
construction of sidewalks and street-crossings, and the installation                         
of traf<U+FB01>c control devices can increase the proportion of children                            
walking to school in areas where these changes are made (Boarnet                             
et al., 2005). The overall “walkability” of the neighborhood (Kerr                           
et al., 2006) is also a factor associated with children walking or                           
bicycling to school. Another bene<U+FB01>t of walking or bicycling to                               
															
school in safe environments is that children can travel independently. 
Evidence suggests that the skills children develop from
independent journeys can bene<U+FB01>t social, emotional and cognitive
development (Joshi and MacLean, 1995).
Within this context, policies to encourage additional active
modes of travel for children are seen as one component of
reducing childhood obesity levels. The literature on travel and
urban form has informed work in this area, however, parental
perceptions, lifestyles, and employment activities may be equally
important elements in the decision on how children travel to
school. The research presented here investigates these issues by
examining relationships between the parent (or caregivers) walking 
behavior and the choice of allowing children to use active
modes of travel to school. Parental walking behavior is a proxy for
household lifestyles (including employment activities) and perceptions 
of the built environment and can serve as a key mediator
in analyzing the choice of letting children use active modes of
travel to school.
The perceptions that parents have about their neighborhood
can be an important determinant of the mode used by children for
their school trip. Since parents (or other caregivers) ultimately
decide on the child's mode of travel to school, their perceptions are
a critical determinant of a child's travel behavior. These perceptions 
may be strongly tied to the speci<U+FB01>c local environment of

their residential location as well as the route traveled to school.
In particular, parental perceptions of traf<U+FB01>c safety and neighborhood 
safety are stronger predictors of school travel mode than
factors associated with urban form (McDonald, 2008a, Timperio
et al., 2006, Kerr et al., 2006, McMillan, 2007, Timperio et al.,
2004). Parental perceptions of crime, limited public transport, no
lights or street-crossings, number of street-crossings necessary to
get to school, no parks or sports <U+FB01>eld or playgrounds, and driver
attitudes to speeding are negatively associated with parents
letting their child walk to school (Timperio et al., 2006, Timperio
et al., 2004, Dellinger, 2002). The presence of sidewalks and
walking and bicycle facilities, as perceived by parents, are also
important variables in deciding on the feasibility of allowing a
child to walk to school (Kerr et al., 2006). McDonald et al. (2010)
additionally argued that the social environment, i.e., “child-centered 
social control”, de<U+FB01>ned as an expectation that residents in a
neighborhood will be protective of the children in the neighborhood 
may affect the likelihood that parents will allow their
children to walk to school.
Parental employment patterns, especially whether the mother
has part-time or full-time employment, is associated with how
school trips are made. Mothers with part-time employment have
been found to drive their children to school more frequently, or be
available when the children need to go to school (McDonald,
2008c, Timperio et al., 2006, Black et al., 2001). The commute trip
for women is typically shorter (or closer to the home) than that for
men (Madden, 1981, Turner, Niemeier, 1997) implying they may
have more responsibility (or sole responsibility) within a household 
for getting children to school.
The main research questions investigated are the following.
Is there a relationship between the walking activity of parents and
whether children walk or bicycle to school? Is there any difference
in this association when other school transportation modes are
included (school buses and public transportation)? For example, in
New Jersey school buses are made available when the student lives
two miles or more from their school, thus we would expect some
differences in choices when included in the analysis. How do
perceptions of the neighborhood environment affect caregiver
choice of how children travel to school?
These research questions imply the following two key hypotheses 
that are tested in our analysis. First, it is hypothesized that
when parents or caregivers are dissatis<U+FB01>ed with various neighborhood 
characteristics, especially those associated with the safety of
the neighborhood, there is a reduced likelihood that a child uses
an active mode of travel to school. Second, it is hypothesized that
when parents or caregivers themselves engage in more walking
activity, their children are more likely to walk or bicycle to school.
Parents may choose to live in a neighborhood because their
children can then walk to school as well as being more inclined to
walk themselves. This creates a problem of self-selection in our
data; however, recent research suggests this may not be a major
problem (Cao et al., 2009), though we recognize this as a limitation
in our analysis. The availability of walking opportunities, because a
neighborhood is more walkable, may also determine parental
walking habits and in turn in<U+FB02>uence their decision to allow
children to walk or bicycle to school. To explore these hypotheses
explicitly, we also control for household socio-economic characteristics 
and density of public schools in each school district; the
latter is a proxy for distance to schools, which was not available in
our data. We expect that children from white non-Hispanic and
high income households will be less likely to take active school
trips and that there will be a positive association between school
density and active travel mode choice. According to McDonald
(2008b), the behavior of white non-Hispanic and high income
households is mainly due to living in lower density areas with
distances to school that are not amenable to walking.

2. Methods

2.1. Data

Our analysis used data obtained from a cross-sectional survey
of pedestrian activity, behavior and attitudes in New Jersey. The
key focus of this survey was to gather data on the walking
behavior of New Jersey residents as well as their perceptions of
how walkable their local environment is. For those respondents
with children additional information on their school trip mode
was collected.
As the survey was not designed exclusively to analyze school
trips, there are various shortcomings in the information available.
This includes no information on the distance to the school or its
location. We supplemented the data with public school data from
New Jersey to build a variable for public school density to serve as
a proxy for distance in our analysis. School trip information was
gathered for only one child in each household (oldest and youngest 
were selected at random); this was done primarily to not
overburden respondents, as the school trip information was not
the primary purpose of the survey. An additional omission was
determining whether the respondent was the parent or caregiver,
but all respondents were adults aged 19 or over.2
The data was collected via a random-digit-dial telephone
survey in November 2009. The statewide sample was supplemented 
with an oversample of Jersey City, in order to obtain a larger
sample from a more walkable area. Overall there were 1200
completed interviews, 400 of which were the Jersey City oversample. 
From the combined sample, 374 respondents had children
who attended school and for whom information on the school trip
was collected. After excluding records with missing values, 353
observations are used in the analysis. The survey protocol was
approved by the Rutgers University Institutional Review Board.
Respondents' age ranges between 19 and 84. Most are likely
parents; others would most likely be caregivers, guardians, or
others living in the household (such as older siblings, grandparents, 
or other relatives). As there is no way of identifying the
speci<U+FB01>c relationship, the term caregiver is used throughout this
paper. Considering that about 80% of the respondents' ages are
between 30 and 55, however, the observations, by and large, most
likely represent parental responses.3

2.2. Model speci<U+FB01>cation

Binary logit models were estimated to examine how parental
walking habits and perceptions of neighborhood characteristics
are associated with the modes children use for school travel. Two
different binary dependent variables are estimated in separate
logit models. One set of models evaluates the active modes
(walking and bicycle versus all others). The second set of models
evaluates all instances of not being driven to school versus being
driven (i.e., including school buses and public transportation).
Table 1 provides a breakdown of the distribution of these categories. 
Nearly 30% of children in the sample walked or bicycled to
school. With inclusion of the school bus and public transportation
modes, 57.5% of children in the sample are not driven to school (13
of the children take public transportation).
Independent variables include socio-economic characteristics,
public school density, parental walking habits, and parental

The survey did not include information on the residential address of
respondents. Instead we asked respondents what the nearest intersection to their
home was; this was subsequently geo-coded to provide home location data.

Those respondents with children in the household have a mean age of 42,
while those without have a mean age of 58, lending support to the assumption that
respondents are caregivers.
satisfaction with the built environment and neighborhood safety.
The socio-economic characteristics used are those of the adult
respondent. The only information obtained on the children was
their mode of travel to school. Ethnic groups were divided into
non-Hispanic white and other. Since non-Hispanic white families
are more likely to own a car and have other options, they are more
sensitive to the travel behavior of their child (McDonald, et al.,
2010). As “choice walkers”(McDonald and Aalborg, 2009), they are
more likely to use a car than other ethnic groups.
As mentioned previously, employment status – full-time, part-time 
or unemployed – can affect the <U+FB02>exibility of a caregivers'
schedule. The data available from the survey identi<U+FB01>es the
employment status of the respondent. We categorize the employment 
status of the respondent based on their gender and whether
they are employed full-time or part-time. These four categories are
compared to a reference category that includes unemployed and
looking for work, retired, going to school, homemaker, and
disabled/unable to work. Our assumption is that those who are
not working will have more <U+FB02>exibility to take children to school
and more time to accompany them by walking.4 We also include a
dummy variable for annual income greater than $100,000. Public
school density (the number of public schools per square mile) is
used as a proxy for school distance. The greater the density, the
closer a school is expected to be to a respondents' home. The
number of vehicles owned by a household is an important factor
affecting school children's travel mode and is also included in the
models. The measure of parental walking activity was based on a
question on walking frequency. This was asked as a categorical
variable based on whether the respondent walks more than once a
day, once a day, several times a week, or several times a month or
a few times a year or less (this latter is the reference category in
the regression models).
Survey respondents were asked to rate their satisfaction with
nine neighborhood characteristics using a four point Likert scale.
Satisfaction with crime prevention and policing, quality of sidewalks, 
quality of crosswalks, quality of street lighting, quality of
traf<U+FB01>c signals and signs, traf<U+FB01>c law enforcement, availability of
parks or playgrounds that can be walked to, overall safety of
pedestrians, and overall quality of the neighborhood for walking
were used. These were coded as dummy variables based on
whether they indicated they were satis<U+FB01>ed or not satis<U+FB01>ed. Our
second set of models tests the additional effect of these variables
on the choice of mode for the school trip.
Results are presented as odds ratios. This can be interpreted as
the relative likelihood that the variable affects the outcome.
An odds ratio greater than one is equivalent to a positive
coef<U+FB01>cient or effect, while those less than one are equivalent to a
negative coef<U+FB01>cient or effect.

3. Results

Summary statistics for the independent variables used in the
regressions are in Table 2. The frequency of walking was measured
using the question, “on average, about how often do you walk
outdoors for 5 min or more?”. Some 83.3% of respondents walked
at least several times a week. Less than 17% walked outdoors
several times a month or a few times a year. Regarding satisfaction
with neighborhood characteristics, at least 65% of respondents say
that they are satis<U+FB01>ed with each individual characteristic. Almost
90% of respondents are satis<U+FB01>ed with traf<U+FB01>c signals and signs, but
the satisfaction level drops to 66.6% for the quality of sidewalks,
the neighborhood characteristic for which there is the least
satisfaction. These satisfaction variables represent the perception
that respondents have on these neighborhood attributes.
Model estimation results are shown in Tables 3 and 4. The
latter includes neighborhood satisfaction variables. Two binary
logit models are estimated for each set of variables, one for the
active modes (walking and bicycling) vs. non-active modes, and
the second for non-car modes (walking, bicycling, bus) vs. being
driven to school.
White non-Hispanic households are less likely to engage in
active modes of travel. This may be due to most living in more
suburban neighborhoods with minimal walking infrastructure,
while other ethnic groups live in more walkable urban neighborhoods. 
There is, however, no statistically signi<U+FB01>cant ethnicity
difference in the models for all non-car modes versus being driven.
Interestingly, 85% of white non-hispanic respondents are satis<U+FB01>ed
or very satis<U+FB01>ed with the walking environment in their neighborhood. 
White Hispanic and black populations are less satis<U+FB01>ed
(about 75% are satis<U+FB01>ed or very satis<U+FB01>ed).
As public school density increases, school children are more
likely to walk to school. This is true because more densely
populated urban areas will tend to have schools located in closer
proximity to residents, if only because they have more public
schools. As mentioned previously, this variable serves as a proxy
for distance to the school, given that we did not have the actual
distances in our data. Earlier results that omitted this variable gave
essentially the same results as when it is included.
Those households with a female respondent who is employed
part-time are also less likely to have a child use an active or noncar 
mode for traveling to school. Male respondent employment
status generally has no effect. While these variables do not fully
capture the pattern of employment in a household, this result
suggests that the schedule of women is important and that they
are more likely to take on the responsibility of getting children to
school. The relationship is especially strong for women working
part-time. We can only speculate as to the cause of this relationship. 
There may be two behavioral responses occurring: those
with a full-time job have less <U+FB02>exibility and thus drive their
children to school as part of a regimented routine, while those
working part-time might have more <U+FB02>exibility which in itself gives
them the time to drive their child to school. This result holds
across all the binary choices modeled. The role that household
work schedules play in school travel decisions is clearly deserving
of additional research.
Odds ratios for the income dummy variable are less than one
(implying a negative effect), and only statistically signi<U+FB01>cant in the
active travel models at the 90% level. This implies that wealthier
households are less likely to allow their children to walk to school
or that they might select their children's school based on characteristics 
other than proximity. As the number of vehicles owned
by a household increases, school children are also less likely to
walk or bicycle and more likely to be driven to school. This effect
occurs in all the models estimated.
The more frequently the respondent engages in walking activity, 
the more likely a child engages in active travel for the school
trip. In particular, the strength of this association is strongest for
frequent walkers (at least once a day). This <U+FB01>nding supports the
hypothesis that caregiver walking habits are an important factor in
allowing children to travel to school by active modes. In the model
that includes bus use among the non-car modes, the frequency of
walking among parents or caregivers had no in<U+FB02>uence on the
likelihood of children using non-car modes versus being driven to
school. Thus, the inclusion of buses changes the association with
parental walking habits, most likely because those having their
children use the bus live further from the school. While this is
surprising it does add additional support to the hypothesis that
parental walking habits affect how parents let their children walk
to school, when the option to walk is readily available. One
interpretation is that the caregiver who walks more will transmit
this behavior to their child. An alternative explanation is that the
likelihood of the respondent walking more frequently may be due
to unmeasured attributes of neighborhood walkability that also
make it more feasible for children to walk to school.
One potential caveat to this result is that respondent walking
frequency may be partly due to walking their child to school.
However, only 33% of our sample reported this as a reason they
walked in the previous 30 days. Table 5 shows results for 15
different reasons given by our survey respondents. The reasons
most often reported were for pleasure or relaxation, physical
exercise or going for a stroll. While only 16 respondents reported
no reasons for walking in the last 30 days, of those who reported
walking a child to school, all reported other walking trip purposes.
Thus, this suggests that the walking activity of the respondent is
not just due to their walking a child to school.
The perceived attributes of the neighborhood are further
controlled for in the models shown in Table 4. The results on
respondent satisfaction with neighborhood attributes show relatively 
weak effects, while the walking frequency estimates are of a
similar magnitude to the models in Table 3. Walking frequency is
not correlated with any of the satisfaction variables (results not

shown), so inclusion of these variables suggests that the behavior
of the caregiver may be an important determinant of active travel
to school, rather than perceptions of various neighborhood attributes. 
The correlation between the perceived satisfaction, caregiver 
walking behavior, and the socio-economic variables was
examined and there were no strong correlations. Factor analysis
was also used to see if there were any patterns in the perceived
satisfaction variables, but none were found, thus all the variables
are included in the model.
Of those perception variables, satisfaction with the quality of
sidewalks is associated with increased use of active travel modes
for the school trip, however, this does not hold up for non-car
travel to school (i.e., including buses). Satisfaction with the availability 
of parks or playgrounds that can be walked to is positively
associated with active travel for school trips, as well. The association 
between this variable and travel by active modes is stronger
than that of satisfaction with the quality of sidewalks. These two
variables indicate that physical infrastructure could be of importance 
for safe routes to school. An interesting result is that
parental satisfaction with traf<U+FB01>c law enforcement is negatively
associated with the use of active modes although the level of
statistical signi<U+FB01>cance is weak, below the 90% level of con<U+FB01>dence
(z ¼1.33). It was expected that this would be a positive effect, so it
is surprising that as satisfaction with traf<U+FB01>c enforcement increases,
active travel to school decreases. One possible reason is that
perhaps those areas with higher levels of traf<U+FB01>c enforcement
(and consequently higher satisfaction) are also those with less
safe traf<U+FB01>c conditions. None of the satisfaction variables have any
reasonable level of statistical signi<U+FB01>cance in how they affect the
choice of non-car modes (i.e., including buses) vs. driving.
Research in Australia (Timperio et al., 2006, Timperio et al.,
2004, Dellinger, 2002) assessed perceptions that children have
about perceptions on their journey to school. They found stronger
associations between similar factors and active travel. The analysis
here assessed parental satisfaction, not that of children. As parents
are the decision-makers, it is a bit surprising that associations
were not found with most of these factors.

4. Conclusions
One limitation of this analysis is that the survey was not
designed to explicitly analyze school travel. The main omissions
were that there was no information on the distance to the school
from the home and there was only information on one child from
each household. Additional data on whether caregivers walked

with their children and more detail on household employment
patterns would also be desirable. However, given these constraints, 
the analysis still provides useful information for understanding 
how household walking behavior may in<U+FB02>uence the
active travel of children for their school trip.
Despite these limitations a key result of this analysis is the
linkage between employment patterns, walking frequency of
respondents (most likely parents), and the mode chosen for the
school trip. Associations between parental satisfaction with neighborhood 
characteristics were generally not a major factor in choice
of school trip mode. Results also show some differences associated
with the choice of an active travel mode (walking and bicycling)
versus all potential non-car travel modes (i.e., including buses).
Household socio-economic factors – non-minority ethnic status, 
female respondent employment type, higher income, and
vehicle ownership – are negatively associated with active travel
to school (walking or bicycling). Higher public school density is
positively associated with choice of walking or bicycling. Increased
vehicle ownership is associated with reduced active travel to
school and increases the likelihood of children being driven to
school. It is likely that those households with more vehicles live in
neighborhoods that are less walkable.
The <U+FB02>exibility of caregivers to both assist with active travel and
to drive children to school seems to be largely dependent on the
female respondent's work status. Those that do not work, may
have the <U+FB02>exibility to have their children use active travel modes
(perhaps because they have time to accompany them). Another
explanation is that for those who are employed, time constraints
and convenience make it easier to simply drive children to school
by maintaining a regimented schedule. This effect is stronger for
those women respondents who are employed part-time. One
could argue that this provides them with the <U+FB02>exibility to drive
their children to school, and their choice to work part-time may
re<U+FB02>ect a desire to be engaged with their child's education. These
issues clearly deserve more detailed analysis with more directed
survey questions.
Those respondents that engage in more walking activity are
also more likely to not drive their children to school. This could
represent other unmeasured factors associated with the built
environment of the neighborhood, including more walkable infrastructure 
and local activities that can be walked to; however, given
that the satisfaction variables do not reduce the magnitude of the
walking frequency effect, it is likely that there is some element of
parental or household behavior that leads to more active school
travel for children. It is also possible, that those households that
desire to walk more self-select to live in a more walkable
neighborhood, both for themselves and so their children can be
more active and independent.
Policy implications derived from this work suggest that <U+FB01>nding
ways to in<U+FB02>uence the behavior of parents can be bene<U+FB01>cial for
increasing active travel to school by children. While providing
more opportunities for children to walk to school by providing
safer walking environments is clearly bene<U+FB01>cial, supportive
parental behaviors are a necessary factor, especially among
non-minority higher income households. Understanding how
constraints on time and parental employment in<U+FB02>uences the
propensity to not drive children to school needs additional
research, but policy focused on parental behaviors can be helpful
for increasing active travel to school.