Evaluation of a walking school bus service as an intervention for a modal

In recent decades, the proportion of students using motorized transportation to school has increased while active
transportation has decreased. The walking school bus is one of the most used interventions aiming to reduce
problems resulting from this trend. However, no studies have analysed the in<U+FB02>uence of a WSB service provided by
professional monitors on a shift in modes of transportation.
This study investigated a pioneer daily walking school bus service guided by paid staff implemented at a
primary school in C   ordoba, Spain. A mobile app is used to register the children's participation and to provide the
parents with real-time information on the group's location and arrival at the destination. Collected data, including
the families' responses to a questionnaire were used to assess participation and the shift in modes of
transportation.
During the pilot study, a high recurrence in the children's participation was found and 43.7% of the participants
had completely or partially changed transportation modes. The families reported fewer problems in the children's
daily school travel organization and an improvement in their pedestrian safety behaviours. Further, 92.1% of the
participating families had less concern about their children's autonomous walking.
Results indicate that a walking school bus service guided by paid monitors can be an effective way to increase
active travel to school, especially for children who live further from it. The use of the mobile app can reduce
parents’ concerns and facilitate the management and evaluation of the method. Implications are discussed for
future Active Travel to School interventions that focus on changes in modes of transportation.

1. Introduction                                                                                  
													
Children's modes of transportation to school have changed signi<U+FB01>cantly 
during the past few decades, with an increase in parents driving                               
their children to school and a decrease in walking to school (Fyhri et al.,                       
2011; McDonald et al., 2011). As a result, fewer primary school students                          
are now autonomously walking to school. The increase in driving children 
to school has caused problems at the urban level (Marique et al.,                            
2013), in the daily organization of families (McDonald, 2008; He, 2013),                          
and related to children's health and psychosocial development (Mackett,                               
2013; Foster et al., 2014).                                                                       
In this context, a variety of activities and transportation policies have                     
been developed to decrease the number of children driven to school and                            
to promote active travel to school (ATE, 2007; NCSRTS, 2007; Chillon et                      
al., 2011; Green Communities Canada, 2011). Many of these measures                                
are based on improvements to infrastructure for pedestrian travel.                                

However, some studies point out that the low ef<U+FB01>ciency of some of these
projects might be because they do not meet families’ needs (McDonald
and Aalborg, 2009; Stone et al., 2014).
The problems related to primary school students' mobility must be
understood in the context of household decisions (Faulkner et al., 2010).
Some of the major factors that in<U+FB02>uence families' modes of transportation
are the distance to the school, the parents’ concerns about traf<U+FB01>c or the
possibility that their children might be hurt, and work-school time restrictions 
(Stewart et al., 2012).
Among the alternatives of the Active Travel to School projects, the
walking school bus (WSB) is a promising intervention; however, the
bene<U+FB01>ts and potential to trigger changes in transportation routines have
yet to be widely studied (Smith et al., 2015). The WSB consists of a group
of children that walks to school accompanied by one or more adults,
usually along a previously agreed-on route with possible intermediate
stops. The WSB could be an appropriate way to overcome the major

barriers to active transportation, such as families' fears related to                          
autonomous walking, parents’ needs to escort their children, and the                           
distances that the children walk (Stone et al., 2014). Although the WSB                        
solution does not offer complete autonomy to the children, it could be a                            
valuable tool to reduce fears about children walking unaccompanied by                          
their relatives and to help parents feel comfortable about their children                      
walking to school.                                                                             
Several studies have identi<U+FB01>ed many advantages, challenges, and                           
limitations of WSB (Table 1). The major bene<U+FB01>ts to participants or other                       
people involved in a WSB programme are the time saved by the parents                           
(Kearns et al., 2003), health bene<U+FB01>ts (Collins and Kearns, 2005; Kearns et                          
al., 2003; Kingham and Ussher, 2007), increased sense of community                             
(Collins and Kearns, 2010; Kingham and Ussher, 2005), children's socialization 
(Kearns et al., 2003; Kingham and Ussher, 2005), children's                        
greater independence (Kingham and Ussher, 2005), and a high level of                           
participant satisfaction with a healthy and supportive environment that                        
promotes social interaction and physical activity (Kong et al., 2009).                         
However, the previous studies all refer to WSB as staffed by volunteer                    
adults. Although this approach could positively in<U+FB02>uence parents’ decisions 
to not use their cars, Collins and Kearns (2010) pointed out that                      
taking part as accompanying adults is an additional burden and liability                       
on the families, which reduces the convenience to the families that are                        
relatively willing to use it. Thus, the dif<U+FB01>culty obtaining volunteers becomes 
a major barrier to the sustainability of WSBs. Smith et al. (2015)                       

suggested paying the WSB coordinators/monitors and using mobile applications 
to support WSB management as possible solutions to recruitment and liability problems.
Furthermore, although there is evidence that WSB promotes an increase 
in the number of children that walk to school, it has been evaluated 
using self-assessment questionnaires, which can produce social
desirability bias (Heelan et al., 2009; Mendoza et al., 2009, 2011). Only
Collins and Kearns (2005, 2010) estimated the savings in car trips achieved 
by the WSB. However, they used indirect methods, such as personal
estimates provided by WSB coordinators and survey data.
Moreover, mobile technologies currently have a particularly relevant
role in the daily organization of personal transportation. Some activities,
such as checking on bus locations in real time (Watkins et al., 2011) or
identifying a group of individuals for carpooling (Shaheen et al., 2016),
have become increasingly common. Public administrations also are
beginning to understand that dynamic transportation data allow them to
devise more effective plans for transportation infrastructure and services
(Yujuico, 2015). These trends are helping to develop an emerging
discipline known as Computational Transportation Science (Winter et
al., 2011). In this sense, new technologies could be useful (Dickinson et
al., 2015; Weiser et al., 2016) for promoting the creation of WSB groups
at educational centres, management of the daily development of WSB
and communication among the participants, and for the collection of
real-time operational data.

Considering this background, it is necessary and possible to implement 
objective assessments to support the potential of these interventions 
as transportation policies. For example, a pilot WSB service
using professional monitors was offered free of charge to the families of a
primary school in C    ordoba, Spain. A mobile app was used to log the
children's participation in the WSB. This paper presents an analysis of
that programme along with an analysis of an initial mobility survey and a
<U+FB01>nal assessment questionnaire. Thereby, the study aims to lower
participation barriers and objectively assess the potential reduction of car
trips that might be obtained through this innovative service.

2. Methodology

2.1. Characteristics of the school study site

This study was conducted at a publicly subsidized school in C ordoba,
Spain, with a student body of 450 primary grade children, in 2014–2015.
The school also offers Preschool, Compulsory Secondary Education, and
Non-compulsory Post-Secondary Education modules. The school is in a
middle-class neighbourhood with commercial and residential urban
zoning, and it is near the city centre. The distances from the children's
homes to the school widely range due to its easy access on foot and by
motor vehicle and because of the criteria used to allocate students to
schools in Andalusia. No previous Active Travel to School campaign had
been tried among these families and the school administration had not
previously considered any problems with the daily transportation of their
pupils.

2.2. Design characteristics of the pilot study

A cost-free daily WSB pilot programme using professional paid
monitors to and from school was implemented at the school. The participants’ 
family members were not required to accompany the children,
although it was permitted during the <U+FB01>rst few days of the programme for
any family member who deemed it essential to gain suf<U+FB01>cient con<U+FB01>dence
before participating in the WSB programme.
The families were provided with a mobile application for the smartphone 
Trazeo (2014), which allowed them to pinpoint the group's location, 
obtain relevant noti<U+FB01>cations, and communicate with the monitors
and other participants in the WSB in real time. The monitors used the
same application to collect the children's participation data and provide
information on the location of the group. The human resources used in
the programme (excluding the research team) were one WSB monitor for
each 12 children and one coordinator of all of the WSBs, who managed
problem-solving, organizing and supervising routes, and for communication 
and diffusing the project to the educational community. An
educational service company recruited the monitors from among young
candidates with previous experience as school monitors or in children's
recreational activities. The coordinator was a person with training and
experience in citizen participation and sustainable mobility. The monitors 
and the coordinator needed basic technological skills in mobile applications. 
The costs of the WSB staff were covered by the research
project (see Acknowledgments).
Because of the temporary nature of the research project, the pilot
lasted 14 weeks. The <U+FB01>rst stage began at the end of a school year and the
reactivation (second) stage began at the beginning of the next school
year. Before implementation, the families were informed that the service
would not continue after the study concluded.

2.3. Previous collection of information and route design

Before the implementation of the WSB service, a voluntary questionnaire 
was distributed to the family members of all of the primary
school children to collect data on their modes of travel to school on a
daily basis, the locations of their homes, their willingness to participate
in the WSB service, and to ask for consent to participate in the study.

In the project's framework, a Google Maps-based application was
developed to visualize the participants' family data. Each item was
associated with the following variables: (1) home, (2) mode of transportation, 
and (3) willingness to participate in the WSB, using the answers 
to the following questions: (1) How does your child usually get to
school? and (2) Would you take part in the walking school buses if they
suited your needs? On the map shown in Fig. 1, the location of the icon
indicates the location of the home. The transportation mode is symbolized 
by the type of icon, such that a <U+FB01>gure of a pedestrian indicates that a
child walked or biked to school and a car indicates children driven to
school. The willingness to participate is shown via the colour of the icon:
green indicates that they would participate and red indicates that they
would not participate. For each item, the walking distance from the home
to the school was calculated for the shortest route using the Google Maps
function.
Using the information in Fig. 1, three WSB routes were designed that
complied with the following criteria:
First, the proximity of routes to the homes of the families willing to
participate.
 Second, the proximity of routes to the homes of the families that were
driving the children to school.
 Third, the total length of the routes of about 1500 m, the locations of
the starting points, and some intermediate stops to pick up and drop
off children to facilitate participation for parents who needed to
continue on to their workplace after dropping off their children at
school. Later, the lengths of some of the routes were extended in
response to some parents' requests because they lived beyond the
routes' starting points.

2.4. Development of the walking school bus service

After the routes were designed and veri<U+FB01>ed on-site, and before the
WSB service was implemented, a comprehensive campaign publicized it
along with trainings and awareness-raising efforts regarding child
mobility and the use of the application. The routes and schedules were
published on the project's Internet website, through which interested
families could register their children for their preferred route.
The WSB operation proceeded as follows. The monitors began
walking at the starting points of each route and collected or delivered the
children at their pre-determined stops until the destination was reached.
Whenever a child joined or left the group, the monitor logged the information 
in the available group list of the mobile app (Fig. 2a) and
ticked or unticked the names of those children. Thus, during a group's
progress along a route, the parents of the participants could know in real
time the location of the group (Fig. 2b). In addition, parents could receive
noti<U+FB01>cations alerting them that the WSB had begun, that their child had
joined or left the group, and that the WSB had <U+FB01>nished the route.
Moreover, a group chat (Fig. 2c) was available to all family members
registered for a given WSB route, the monitors, and the coordinator to
inform all interested parties of any problem or incident. The following
data were automatically recorded in the database through the mobile
application: the participation of each child in a walk; the time, date and
location where he or she was collected or delivered; the number of
participants in each walk; and the total distance walked.
During the third week of the WSB project, some information on the
development of the project was sent to families and different educational
activities, adapted to each of the educational levels at the school, were
developed in the classrooms, to explain to the children how a WSB
operates and how they could join one, with the goal of increasing
participation in the WSB programme.
To compute the churn rate after a lengthy break, such as the summer
holidays, the authors implemented a reactivation (second) stage for the
groups during the <U+FB01>rst four weeks of the second school year. The coordinator 
used the group chat function of the mobile app during the week
before the beginning of the reactivation stage to inform the participating

transportation to school had occurred, whether the mobile app had
lessened their fears about their children's autonomous walking to school,
and about the observed bene<U+FB01>ts and disadvantages that they experienced
after participation in the WSB.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Participant characteristics

From the 304 initial mobility questionnaires collected, 294 reported
their address with which the home-to-school distances could be calculated. 
Although a wide range of distances was found (Table 2), most of
the students lived between 500 and 2000 m from the school.
During the study, the three WSB groups operated daily. The WSB
routes began during the last term of school year 2014–2015 (from April
28, 2015, to June 22, 2015), and these routes were reactivated on the
<U+FB01>rst day of school of the following school year (2015–2016), running
from September 10, 2015, to October 9, 2015, totalling 59 days and 354
walks. Altogether, 55 students from 31 families participated in the WSB
service in both stages. In the <U+FB01>rst stage, 47 students participated, and the
second one had 39 participants.
The characteristics of the sample are shown in Table 3, which indicates 
no children living between zero and 500 m from the school took
part in the project. Although a high potential for participation among
children living 1500–2000 m from the school (27.3%) was observed,
most of the participants lived between 1000 and 1500 m from the school.
The WSB service particularly attracted the interest of families with more
than one child, possibly because it offered an alternative that inspires
con<U+FB01>dence regarding the youngest children's walk to school while
enabling the older children to gain responsibility and autonomy.

3.2. Evolution and recurrence of participation

Thanks to the systematic collection of data on the children's attendance 
by the mobile app, it was possible to study the temporal evolution
of new additions to and dropouts from the WSB and to assess the daily
participation of the children. Altogether, 1705 daily attendances were
registered. Because the children could walk to school and back home on
one day, the total number of registered child participations to and from
school was 2.642, and the average of daily walks per child was 1.70
walks per day. This <U+FB01>nding indicates that many of the children used the
WSB both to and from school. Fig. 3 shows the numbers of active participants, 
additions, and dropouts for each week, calculated as the difference 
between the accrued additions and dropouts.
Fig. 3 indicates that the biggest increases in new additions occurred
during the <U+FB01>rst two weeks and the fourth week of the <U+FB01>rst stage, when the
intense communication campaign took place. At the beginning of the
second stage, the coordinator communicated again about WSB availability, 
which led to another increase in participants. However, during
the weeks when no intense campaign was made, participation was stable.
This result suggests that appropriate communications before and/or
during implementation of a WSB service could enhance the recruitment
of participants.
Regarding dropouts, most of the children who left the WSB did so
during the last weeks of the <U+FB01>rst stage because, among other reasons, the
12-year-olds stopped participating in the project after <U+FB01>nishing Primary

education, which also triggered the loss of some of their younger brothers
and/or sisters. Collins and Kearns (2010) found that, in a volunteer WSB,
dropouts by older siblings could trigger the loss of the WSB. In this study's
WSB service model, this problem was not as relevant because the younger
children who began traveling to school without depending on their
parents' escort could replace the older participants who left the service as
they yearly aged out. Also, some families decided not to use the WSB
service in the second stage, despite their high levels of satisfaction with
the service, because of the temporary nature of the research project. It is
possible that maintaining the service would have prevented these
dropouts.
On the other hand, the recurrence index (IR) was de<U+FB01>ned using the
participation data as the sum of a child's effective participation days
divided by the total number of days from his or her <U+FB01>rst to his or her last
participation. In this way, a recurrence index of ‘1’ indicates daily
participation during the stay in the project, regardless of the day in the
stage that they joined the group for the <U+FB01>rst time or the day that they left
it. Table 4 shows the results of this index calculated for the 55 child
participants and the percentages by quintile.
Overall, 81.8% of the children participated for more than 80% of the
days during their participation in the project, and 96.4% used the WSB
more than 60% of the days. Therefore, this WSB service could be a
popular daily alternative mode of transportation for the children and it
could result in rapid and permanent modal shifts if it were designed to
meet the families’ needs, particularly those families that drive their
children to school. The monitors and many of the families reported that
the children enjoyed their daily social experiences with other children
while walking to school. In fact, the children often asked their parents to
continue participating in the project after they tried it out.
Although the novelty of the WSB might have in<U+FB02>uenced participation,
the qualitative comments, the monitors' and the coordinator's direct
observations, and the participation data indicate that novelty was not a
decisive factor. On the contrary, the temporary nature of the service
caused some interested families to postpone their decisions for a few
weeks until they heard from participating families. Others decided not to
join because it was not a long-term activity. It can be inferred from the
294)
evolution of the participation and the performance of other regulated
services offered by the school, such as before-school care and the school
dining room, that a WSB service regularly operating free of charge for all
participants would attract many children in the mid-term.
The automatic data collection was a substantial step forward for this
type of project. If this type of implementation were conducted on a large

scale, it would be possible to develop a robust statistical analysis, such as
assessing the in<U+FB02>uences of the WSB on driving distances or estimating
relational models on the effects of the adoption of this service on other
travel behaviours. These future studies could provide more precise
knowledge about children's mobility in cities and support optimization of
and improvements to the Active Travel to School projects.

3.3. Modal shift

The families of every participating student answered this question
asked in the <U+FB01>nal assessment questionnaire: ‘Has the participation of your
child in the walking school bus meant that he/she has replaced being
driven to school by walking to school?’ Table 5 shows the answers,
grouped according to the distance between home and school, whether a
modal shift (MS) had occurred, and whether the participant already
walked (AW). Among those who changed their transportation mode,
answers were divided into three categories: (1) ‘Yes, every day, on the
way to school and back home’, full modal shifters (FMS); (2) ‘Yes, but just
on the way to school or back home’, partial modal shifters (PMS); and (3)
those who reported a change to their transportation mode on some days,
occasional modal shifters (OMS).
In Table 5, 56.3% of the participants already were walking to school
before the pilot programme, but 43.7% of them partially or totally
changed their transportation mode. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude
that the WSB provides a desirable transportation alternative for the
children in the MS category, simultaneously promoting an increase in

autonomy among those who already were walking to school. The modal
shift percentages were higher among those living more than 1500 m from
the school, particularly among those living between 1500 and 2000 m
away from the school, where many of the FMS children lived. Among
those living between 500 and 1000 m from the school, a large modal shift
also occurred, but all of them were in the PMS category, suggesting that
the WSB could replace car trips for families living quite close to the
school and who choose the WSB for personal convenience.
Fewer changes in transportation mode occurred among those who
lived 1000–1500 m from the school. On the other hand, by extending the
length of the WSB routes, children living further than 2000 m from the
school were attracted to the WSB. As expected, the participants living
farther away changed their transportation modes (MS). In addition, a
Kruskal-Wallis test was performed relating the distance interval (between
home and school) to the transportation mode change. The values obtained 
for 1500–2000 m con<U+FB01>rmed that the intervention was more
effective for children living that far from the school (Chisquare ¼ 6.4862; p-value ¼ .03904).
These <U+FB01>ndings have important implications for designing measures
aimed at increasing the number of children engaged in active trans-
portation to school because, based on this study's results, the focus should
be on providing attractive alternatives to families living close to school
that drive the children to school for convenience, those living farther
than 1500 m away from school and driving to school because of the
distance, and, particularly, those living between 1500 and 2000 m from
the school.

3.4. Bene<U+FB01>ts and disadvantages for the families

In the <U+FB01>nal assessment questionnaire, the parents of the participants
were asked to indicate all of the bene<U+FB01>ts they experienced after their
participation in the WSB, noting the importance of each of them on a
scale of 1–5 (where 1 is the most important and 5 is the least important).
Table 6 shows the total accrued results on each item in percentages of
answers and the percentages on importance. In addition, it shows the

percentages on the total number of answers obtained on each item between the MS and the AW groups.
The family members who responded to the survey pointed out that                                
fewer complications were in the family organization (51 of the 55 participants 
and all the AW) and the parents reported more free time (38 of                       
the 55 participants). Thus, the tested WSB service frees up family resources 
because it does not involve parental participation. It increases                       
convenience compared to driving children to school, which is a factor                          
that motivated parents’ decisions. This factor is argued as important                          
(McDonald and Aalborg, 2009), despite the scant attention it has                               
received (Faulkner et al., 2010). Among the bene<U+FB01>ts experienced by the
parents who had previously driven their children to school, reduced use
of the car was an important and commonly mentioned bene<U+FB01>t (20 of the                           
24 MS). Hence, WSB seems to have released the parents from a
self-imposed obligation.                                                                            
Another important bene<U+FB01>t mentioned by the participants' parents (45                       
of the 55 participants), in particular by the MS group (22 of the 24 MS),                      
was improvements in the children's pedestrian safety behaviours after                          
participation in the WSB, which has previously been found (Mendoza et                          
al., 2012). This <U+FB01>nding suggests a positive reinforcement in the parents'                      
decision-making processes when they are deciding whether their children 
will walk to school because it also helps parents to be relatively                        
more con<U+FB01>dent regarding safety around vehicular traf<U+FB01>c. Other bene<U+FB01>ts                          
mentioned by the family members, although to a lesser extent and of less                       
importance, were the children's improved positive attitudes towards                            
school (in particular among the MS group) increased sociable attitudes                         
towards other children, and a more active lifestyle, which was particularly 
important to those in the AW group.                                                      
In the <U+FB01>nal survey, families were also required to report problems or                     
disadvantages of the methodology of WSB implemented. Four families                             
reported in the <U+FB01>nal satisfaction survey that they had not been able to                        
install the app on their smartphones, either because they did not have                         
one or because they had an operating system other than Android. The fact                      
that the app is only available for Android devices is a disadvantage of the                    
app. Although these families could access the group's location on the                               
Internet and receive noti<U+FB01>cations via email, future implementations                            
should adjust to the technological context of the community in which the                       
WSB service is being implemented and its speci<U+FB01>c needs.                                        
												
3.5. Reduced fears related to autonomous walking

Regarding the mobile app that was used during the WSB experience,
it is important to mention that 92.1% of the participating families reported 
that using the tool contributed to reducing their concerns about
their children's autonomous walking. The parents' fears were usually
related to not knowing where and with whom their children were.
However, the proposed solution, which works non-intrusively when the
monitor marks the group's location, provides suf<U+FB01>cient information and
control of the situation to meet parents' needs.

3.6. Cost assessment of the pilot programme

The cost to the company for each monitor was EUR 13 per hour for 2 h
per day. It was necessary to hire four monitors for the three WSB routes
because one route exceeded the twenty-children threshold. The coordinator 
was paid EUR 25 per hour for 1.5 h per day. The total cost of the
WSB service during the pilot amounted to EUR 8350. Considering the
total number of participants, the walks offered, and the cost of the pilot,
the total cost of providing the service to the children during the entire
project period of 14 weeks was EUR 152 per child. The cost is comparable
to bus service in the same city, which is on average EUR 80 per month per
student. Furthermore, although those services are similar in terms of
organization, the WSB provides a wide range of social, energetic, psychological, 
health, and environmental advantages not available through
bus service. Consequently, although larger implementations are necessary 
and its range of action is relatively limited in distance from the
school, this comparison suggests that the WSB service could be cost
competitive under optimal operating conditions. In future applications, if
the cost of the service is covered by the public funds or project sponsors,
it is reasonable to assume that similar results to those presented in this
paper could be expected. Additionally, future studies are needed to assess
the effect of transferring the total cost or a part of it to the families.
To assess the cost per car trip eliminated as the result of using the
WSB, the questionnaire data were contrasted with the participation data
collected by the mobile app. Two data sets were added to determine the
number of eliminated car trips: I) the total number of participations
registered in the database for those children who reported a modal shift

from car to walking every day in both directions (540), and II) the
number of days of participation registered in the database for those
children who changed their modes of transportation only for one of the
daily trips (368). Altogether, 908 car trips were eliminated. Neither the
data of the children who used the service occasionally nor the possible
utilization of shared cars were considered in this analysis. Furthermore,
the parents who dropped off children on their way to work could be
assumed to continue traveling by car. Thus, those trips could not be
eliminated entirely, and there might have been an overestimation in the
reduction of total car trips. According to that, the cost per car trip
eliminated was EUR 9.19, considering the total cost of the pilot. Although
that number seems high, the temporary nature of the pilot experience
and the fact that the intervention did not exclusively focus on students
previously traveling to school by car should be considered. As stated
above, the recurrence of participation, once the service had been experienced, 
was very high. However, student enrolment was progressive,
which meant that participation in the <U+FB01>rst few weeks was lower, which
could have biased this cost upward.

4. Conclusions

In this study, a method was developed to implement a walking school
bus (WSB) service provided by professional monitors with the support of
a coordinator in a primary school in C   ordoba, Spain. Its possible in<U+FB02>uence 
on shifts in modes of transportation was studied. During the last
nine weeks of school year 2014–2015 and the <U+FB01>rst four weeks of school
year 2015–2016, three WSB routes (to and from school) were developed,
and a total of 55 children participated. The monitors used mobile app
Trazeo to register participation by each child along each route, and the
families received real-time information on the locations of the WSB and
on the arrival/departure status of the group. Objectively measured
participation was combined with responses on an initial mobility diagnostic 
questionnaire before the intervention, and an assessment questionnaire 
was administered after the WSB ended.
Despite some negative factors, such as the temporary nature of the
study, lack of campaigns to raise awareness, and lack of direct involvement 
by the school, changes in the transportation routines of many
families were found and sustained during the project. The recurrence in
participation was high, with 81.8% of the children participating more
than 80% of the days. Moreover, participation was successfully reactivated 
in the groups starting on the <U+FB01>rst day of the second school year in
the study.
About 43.7% of the participants completely or partially changed their
modes of transportation to school from automobile to walking. The
largest variations in the transportation modes of the children were among
those who lived 1500 m from the school, particularly those in the range
of 1500–2000 m from the school. Thus, the WSB could be an effective
way to increase the distance threshold currently walked by children and
to reduce car trips undertaken for the parents’ convenience or because of
lack of alternatives.
With this WSB model, the researchers tackled the major barriers to
participation in the WSB, such as parents' lack of free time for escort,
concerns about the risk of accidents, and the safety of the children. All of
the families that used the mobile app stated that it helped them to reduce
their fears about their children's autonomous walking. The families
particularly valued the less complicated family organization, the children's 
improved pedestrian safety behaviours, and the additional free
time as bene<U+FB01>ts of participation. In addition, many of the parents who
drove their children to school indicated that the decreased use of their
cars was a bene<U+FB01>t.
Thanks to the mobile app, it was possible to collect data for this study
and assess the evolution of the use of the WSB in an automatic and easy
way, which is a substantial step forward for this type of project. Larger
implementations over longer periods are necessary to assess the continuity 
of the changes found in this study and the long-term cost bene<U+FB01>ts
when the service is integrated into regular school activities. This study's

results offer an interesting perspective on the implementation of WSB
services focused on increasing convenience for families, using professional monitors, 
and applying mobile applications to increase the active
transportation of children to and from school.