Keep the children walking: active school travel in Tirana, Albania

This paper examines how characteristics of the physical and socio-economic environment in<U+FB02>uence children’s 
school travel mode in Tirana, the capital of Albania. A survey of students aged 11 to 13, revealed
that an overwhelming majority walk to school, while bicycling and bus use are minimal. Students who
walk to school often do so as part of a larger group of schoolmates, attend schools that are located relatively 
near their house, are faced with relatively few major road crossings during their journey, and
belong to families that are less likely to own a car. Children who are driven to school (only 13.5% of
our sample) usually have higher-income families and live farther from the school. Although Tirana’s high
residential density has some environmental drawbacks, we deem it positive in that its result is that most
students live very close to their schools and in close proximity to classmates walking to school. The <U+FB01>ne
grain pattern of the urban public school network contributes to the short distances between schools and
homes. We provide a number of recommendations for the promotion of walking in home-school trips, as
well as for the future physical development of the city and the school network.

1. Introduction                                                                            
											
The transition countries of Eastern Europe, are experiencing a                         
fast shift from mass transit to automobile travel, with grave consequences 
in terms of traf<U+FB01>c <U+FB02>ow, road safety, livability, and environmental 
quality. In these settings, home-school travel, which                               
represents a substantial share of daily trips, is often overlooked                         
in sustainable mobility discourses. Most of the existing studies                           
on this topic, which are conducted in Western nations, stem from                           
the concern that there is a link between active forms of school travel 
(walking or biking) and the general health of schoolchildren                           
(van Loon and Frank, 2011). However, home-school travel also                               
has an impact on urban livability. While research on this topic                            
Eastern Europe is virtually non-existent, based on adult travel                            
studies (see Pucher and Buehler, 2005) children school travel here                         
is expected to raise major safety, equality, and environmental quality 
concerns. In turn, it is evident that the urban form and amenities 
determine whether students travel actively and autonomously                           
to school (van Loon and Frank, 2011).                                                      
The study area of our research is Tirana, the capital of Albania.                      
The purpose of this study, conducted in 2012, is to examine how                            
											
characteristics of the physical environment in<U+FB02>uence children’s											
travel mode choice between home and school in relation to										       
socio-economic variables. In the framework of this study, we carried 
out a travel behavior survey of approximately 500 students	
in grades 6 through 8 from four schools and found that an overwhelming 
majority of students (78.9%) walk to and from school.
This <U+FB01>nding contrasts with a general perception in Tirana, perpetuated 
by the local media, that a substantial portion of children are
driven to school. While Albania’s economic development stage
may largely explain this outcome, a number of environmental factors 
may account for it too. For example, compactness is generally
found to contribute to the minimization of travel distances
(Boussauw et al., 2012). A synopsis of Tirana’s recent urban development 
patterns and mobility issues provides an understanding of
the dynamics that lead to such a high portion of students walking
to school.
The <U+FB01>rst two parts of the article provide the study context. They
contain a brief discussion of the current trends in transport planning 
in Eastern Europe, and present an overview of the relevant literature 
on children’s travel, focusing on active school commute
prevalence and correlates. (Active travel includes walking and
cycling, but the latter is insigni<U+FB01>cant in Tirana.) The third part of
the article describes Tirana’s urban setting, with particular focus
on spatial structure, mobility, and education provision. The fourth
part describes the study design and methodology and presents the
results using descriptive statistics, correlation analysis, and

regression models. The conclusions provide a number of policy
recommendations.
As a case study, this article produces concrete, in-depth, context-dependent 
knowledge rather than ‘‘hard’’ theory (see
Flyvbjerg, 2006). While in most studied contexts a majority of children 
are driven to school (though active modes, especially walking,
are increasingly used for the trip home) in Tirana an exceptionally
high proportion of children walk to and from school. In view of this
fact, the main concern here is an expected shift towards more children 
travelling by car in the future, as incomes and car ownership
grow.
Without data on school travel in other Eastern European capitals, 
it is impossible to say whether Tirana illustrates the problems
of the region as a whole. However, studies on adult travel and land
use trends in Eastern Europe point to a rapid increase in car ownership 
and growing sprawl and suburbanization, amidst a laissez
faire policy environment. Hence, children are likely to become
more car-dependent as well. Therefore, the same goals and policies
that we recommend may be applicable to school travel planning in
other Eastern European cities of similar size.

2. Transport issues in post-socialist Eastern Europe

At the end of communism, the urban transport systems of Eastern 
Europe and Central Asia (the ex-Soviet republics) were overwhelmed 
by two major developments: (1) the precipitous modal
shifts from public transport and non-motorized modes to private
automobiles, and (2) the suburbanization of low density housing
and commercial activities beyond the built-up area created during
communism, which generate additional demand for car travel. In
this relatively new ‘‘car culture’’, the car signi<U+FB01>es not only a trans-
port mode, but also a powerful status symbol (Suchorzewski, 2005;
Pucher and Buehler, 2005; Dimitrov, 2004; Suditu et al., 2010). In
terms of modal shift, in Albania the transformation was more
extreme than elsewhere because car ownership was prohibited
during communism. In terms of land use, by contrast, in Tirana
no middle class suburbs developed.
While the dramatic shift from public transport, biking, and
walking to the private car generally re<U+FB02>ects consumer preference
for the convenience, comfort, speed, <U+FB02>exibility, independence,
and status of the car, it has generated some serious problems: rising 
roadway congestion, parking shortages, air pollution, noise, and
traf<U+FB01>c crashes. The sudden increase in motorization has overwhelmed 
roadway networks. In addition, speeding and reckless
driving are standard, since enforcement of traf<U+FB01>c regulations is
very lax in some post-socialist countries (Pucher and Buehler,
2005).
The poorer countries in the region (i.e. Western Balkan states)
do not have adequate governance structures, funds, and political
will to develop integrated and socially and environmentally sustainable 
transportation systems (see Boussauw, 2012; Nientied,
1998; Andrews, 2005). It is also clear that the attainment of sustainability 
objectives in transport will require signi<U+FB01>cant social
and lifestyle changes, a dif<U+FB01>cult task in view of the psychological
dimension of auto-ownership (the perception of the car as high
status mode). The physical proximity to the west and the motivation 
to join the European Union (which requires compliance with
environmental directives) has been an important catalyst for
change (Pucher and Buehler, 2005; REC, 2008). However, the
track record of transport policy in Western European cities in
terms of reducing car use is less than excellent. Moreover, experience 
has shown that even with Western assistance large scale
institutional reform is not likely to occur in Eastern Europe. Often,
transport goals need to be modest and incremental (Stead et al.,
2008).

3. Children’s travel behavior and school commute: a literature
review

Children’s travel and independent movement as an area of
inquiry dates from the 1970s in the U.K. Two seminal works,
Ward’s ‘‘The Child in the City’’ (1978) and Hillman’s et al. ‘‘One
False Move’’ (1990), advocated a lobby on behalf of children in
transport planning. Their concerns stemmed from the suburbanization 
trends of that era, which led to intense car use in wealthy
peripheries and safety and security problems in deprived urban
cores, thus limiting both urban and suburban children’s free mobility 
and access to the city. The 1970s marked the beginning of the
evolution from ‘‘outdoor’’ and ‘‘walking’’ children to ‘‘indoor’’ and
‘‘chauffeured’’ children.
In the last decade, studies have multiplied, especially in Western 
Europe, the UK in particular, and North America (see
Hillman, 1999; O’Brien et al., 2000; McDonald, 2005; Mackett,
2012). This re<U+FB02>ects growing concerns about health and the environment. 
Studies have found that compared to previous generations, 
the travel patterns of children here have changed
enormously. Parents are adapting to the modern nature of urban
living by con<U+FB01>ning children to the home or by escorting and/or
chauffeuring them in cars. Car travel has become a form of mobile
child care, while allowing children out unaccompanied has become
a marker of neglectful parenthood. However, car-dependency at an
early age may be damaging from an environmental and public
health perspective because children’s current travel behavior
may affect their future travel behavior as adults, while reduced
physical activity and exposure to the outdoor environment may
affect children’s physical and mental health. While the reduction
in children’s walking and cycling is related to the increase in car
ownership, parents’ changing attitudes are also due to the fact that
the outside world is seen as a hostile, dangerous place where children 
are likely to be harmed by motor vehicles or adults. Children
themselves often mirror their parents’ habits and views in regards
to travel (Zwerts et al., 2010).
Negative perceptions are mostly justi<U+FB01>ed: road injuries are a
reality and the quality of public outdoor spaces, especially in the
poorer sections of big cities, has declined. Air, noise, and visual pollution 
(i.e. traf<U+FB01>c and parking), as well as poor urban design, with
spaces unfriendly to walking, are widespread outside pedestrianized 
historic city centers. Other factors, unrelated to the (built)
environment, include increased incomes, increased female participation 
in the workforce, cultural shifts from free play to organized
activities, and increased use of personal electronic home entertainment. 
In some countries, school choice policies that allow children
to attend any school within their city, rather than the nearest to
home, have contributed to growing car use for children’s transport
(Mackett, 2012).
Many studies have focused on the school commute of children.
Most of them are western-based and cross-sectional (Wong et al.,
2011; Lubans et al., 2009; Faulkner et al., 2009; Davison et al.,
2008; Sirard and Slater, 2008). Several recent systematic reviews
consider the relationship between active school travel, the built
environment, and health or <U+FB01>tness correlates. Only one Southeast
European study was identi<U+FB01>ed (Loucaides et al., 2010), which
was conducted in Cyprus (with adolescents rather than children).
The reviews, as well as the studies themselves, have been primarily 
motivated by the increasing prevalence of obesity in children 
and youth, which is found to be in part the result of
insuf<U+FB01>cient physical exercise and excessive car travel, including
travel for school trips. The reviews report strong evidence of a positive 
association between active school travel and other physical
activities, but are less unanimous on the assumed link between
active school travel and lower body mass index. However,

Faulkner et al. (2009) and Sirard and Slater (2008) indicate that
possible health bene<U+FB01>ts of active commuting to school include
higher cardiovascular <U+FB01>tness among youth, which is linked to
higher rates of physical activity.
Generally, it is dif<U+FB01>cult to compare studies on children’s school
commute due to the heterogeneity of sample sizes, family composition, 
school systems, and cultural and environmental characteristics, 
all of which have been examined as potential predictors of
active school travel. Also, some of the inconsistency in empirical
<U+FB01>ndings may be related to the modi<U+FB01>able areal unit problem, a
measurement issue comprised of scale and zoning effects. However, 
a statistically consistent and reliable spatial unit speci<U+FB01>cation
for the study of school travel behavior may not exist, as different
environmental factors may operate on the mode choice process
at different scales (Mitra and Buliung, 2012).
Some studies separate the ‘‘to’’ and ‘‘from’’ school trips because
in western settings the return trip is complicated by afterschool
activities and caregiver schedules (given that many children are
chauffeured). In Tirana these factors are less relevant because the
phenomenon of the child overscheduled with extracurricular activities 
is very rare. On a typical day, public school children <U+FB01>nish
classes around 12.00–1.00 pm and return home for lunch. Sports
and other activities occur later in the afternoon. They are not combined 
with school activities as public schools are not equipped for
this purpose (nor do they include cafeterias). Also, children are
assigned a substantial amount of homework. To allow suf<U+FB01>cient
time for homework, children from middle and upper income
families tend to partake in few extracurricular activities. Poorer
families (which comprise a large number in Tirana) cannot afford
to sign children up for enrichment courses (UNICEF, 2011, 2012).
Below we reiterate some of the most typical <U+FB01>ndings of comparative 
reviews.
Davison et al. (2008) show that children from low socio-economic 
backgrounds are more likely to actively commute. This is
mainly attributed to differences in residential location as opposed
to differences in family car ownership which are observed in Tirana. 
Age and enjoyment of physical activity are not consistently
related to active commuting rates. Often, parents’ busy work
schedules or children’s after-school commitments interfere with
the possibility of walking or cycling. Other socio-economic indicators 
are related to parental attitudes: having parents who have
actively commuted to school as children, or currently walk or cycle
to work, increases the probability that a child will actively commute 
to school. The same is true when parents value physical
activity and the accompanying social interactions for their
children.
More pertinent to our study are environmental characteristics,
such as distance to school, school size, and land use mix. De Boer
and Van Goeverden (2007) and Ewing and Greene (2003) found
that in a large number of Western cities schools have become larger 
and more sparsely located over time, thus increasing homeschool 
distances. The meta-analysis by Davison et al. (2008)
reveals that distance to school is the strongest predictor of children’s 
mode choice, with larger distances associated with lower
rates of active commuting. If the area immediately surrounding
the school is more densely populated and if school enrollments
are lower (i.e. there is a dense network of smaller schools, as in Tirana) 
children are more likely to actively commute. Also, the urban
character of the neighborhoods where children live, and the availability 
and safety of sidewalk infrastructure support active commuting. 
Findings were inconsistent for perceived safety (both
related to traf<U+FB01>c, crime, and harassment), while no effects were
observed for weather or the presence of public transportation.
Parents’ perception of the environment is a stronger predictor of
children’s active commuting patterns than objectively measured
environmental attributes.

Lubans et al. (2011) found that factors which in<U+FB02>uence the likelihood 
that children will actively commute to school include neighborhood 
design, distance, and route safety (mostly corroborated by
our research). They also highlight the importance of the constraining 
in<U+FB02>uence of parents’ restrictions on independent movement, as
well as children’s own fears of traf<U+FB01>c. In contrast, Wong et al.
(2011) found that, aside from distance, commonly assessed features 
of the built environment are not consistently related to active
school travel. Also, the effect of built environment features on
active school travel may vary across age. The built environment
near the location of residence was found to be more strongly correlated 
with mode choice than the built environment around the
school. In associations between the built environment and active
school travel, temporal variations between morning and afternoon
commute were observed too, which may be explained by parental
or caregiver schedules and resource availability.
A few studies focused speci<U+FB01>cally on the relationship between
gender and the prevalence of walking or biking to school (see
McDonald, 2012; McMillan et al., 2006). They found that males
walk to and from school more than females but the differences
were either modest or signi<U+FB01>cantly moderated by caregiver’s
own walking behavior. In contrast, males’ biking commute rates
(which are insigni<U+FB01>cant in Tirana) are much higher than females’.
These differences are likely due to the social construction of girls’
identities as endangered or in need of protection. Other studies,
which have not centered exclusively on gender gaps, have shown
an inconsistent relationship between gender and school travel.
The individual studies and reviews above discuss quantitative
school travel research. A few qualitative studies (by Lang et al.,
2011; Faulkner et al., 2010; Mitchell et al., 2007; Fusco et al.,
2012), which include depth-interviews with parents and draw on
children’s own narratives and pictures, provide further (and a more
nuanced) understanding of school trip modal choice. These studies
found that the ecological acuity of children who are chauffeured to
and from school is reduced and the physical and social worlds
available to them are shrinking. They are only cognizant of the trip
end points, and do not engage with the local spaces in between,
which are critical to learning about the environment. At the same
time, many children desire to travel to school actively and independently 
and experience their surroundings <U+FB01>rsthand, but are
limited in their ability to do so, given the fear and obstacles that
prevail within their neighborhoods. These are physical but also
psychological (i.e. the prevalent social construction of children as
dependent, vulnerable, and in need of constant adult guidance
and supervision). Parental decision making about the trip to school
mode is strongly in<U+FB02>uenced by concerns over the child’s safety, as
well as a perception of which option is more convenient (especially
if parents must trip chain).
In summary, the main factors that support active school travel
in western settings appear to be (not necessarily in order of
importance):

 Short home-school distances.
 Lower socio-economic background.
 Urban character of residence neighborhood.
 Densely populated school neighborhood.
 Caretakers’ schedules.
 Supportive parental attitudes.
 Small school size.
 Male gender.
 Availability of pedestrian infrastructure and route safety.

In the Cyprus based study, Loucaides et al. (2010) report low
rates of active school traveling among Greek adolescents (19.4%)
compared to other European countries (almost 50% in Britain and
as high as 80% in the Netherlands and Belgium) despite the

country’s lower per capita GDP. This suggests that factors unrelated 
to income may play a central role. However, this study is
not readily comparable with the present study and the other
studies included in the literature review due to the distinct age
groups targeted (youth vs. children).


4. Land use and mobility in Tirana: a sketch

Tirana is a dense and compact city of about 700,000 inhabitants,
without separation of commercial and residential uses. Very dense
and chaotic traf<U+FB01>c and unruly driving are the norm. Since the
demise of the communist regime in 1990, Tirana has become a primate 
city within Albania.1 It has almost one third of the national
population, most of the national wealth, and more than twice the
rate of car ownership than the rest of the country.
The removal of restrictions on population movement within
Albania two decades ago led to an enormous wave of migration
into the capital. Tirana experienced a population explosion from
less than 300,000 to more than 650,000 (more than 800,000 in
the metropolitan area). Despite the strain that internal migration
placed on urban infrastructure, the urban economy improved at a
fast pace, due to the transformation to a market economy and substantial 
remittances from numerous emigrants abroad.
Most of the capital’s growth was accommodated within its preexisting 
boundaries. In order to satisfy new housing and service
demand, new mid-rise apartment buildings (typically ten to twelve
stories) were built at a phenomenal pace, squeezed among existing
buildings. The inner city remained the most desirable place to live.
However, the poor were not pushed out because they obtained
their <U+FB02>ats at nominal prices during the privatization. Thus the city
retained a social mix. Now, Tirana’s density (approximately
14,500 inhabitants/sq. km) is high. However, its overall population
and size are small compared to other European capitals. While the
central city is very compact, the metropolitan area sprawls beyond
the Tirana city boundary among seven other small municipalities,
which consist largely of informal settlements built by the poorest
portions of the new migrants from the countryside. While encompassing 
mostly single-family homes, peri-urban settlements have
relatively high density as well.
The inner city is vibrant and offers private services and amenities 
comparable to Western European cities. This is a direct result
of the densi<U+FB01>cation, the <U+FB01>ne-grained land use pattern, and the economic 
transformation. On the other hand, the public sector obtains
only meager revenues due to the fact that much of the income
within the country is earned through remittances and informal
channels and is therefore not taxable. For more background information 
on Tirana, refer to Pojani (2010).
In terms of mobility, private car ownership was prohibited during 
communism. However, unlike other socialist states Albania did
not create a decent public transport system. After the transition,
when restrictions were removed, car ownership skyrocketed.
Now, more than half of the city’s households own a car. The middle
and high income portions of the population are increasingly cardependent. 
Not only were cars purchased to ful<U+FB01>ll mobility needs
(i.e. to counterbalance the poor quality of public transport, pedestrian, 
and bike facilities), but are also seen as symbols of freedom
and social status.
The shift from public and non-motorized transport modes
towards private cars has led to a host of problems including enormous 
health and environmental damage. The capital was not
designed to accommodate cars and is chocked with traf<U+FB01>c much
of the day (Pojani, 2011b). The urban population must endure high

levels of air and noise pollution. The mass of pedestrian traf<U+FB01>c
must navigate under unpleasant conditions, including constantly
having to dodge heavy traf<U+FB01>c, cars parked on the sidewalks, and
dense pedestrian traf<U+FB01>c. The inadequate number of traf<U+FB01>c signals
makes street crossing a treacherous experience. Bicycling was popular 
before 1990, although this was a privilege only of adults, since
few families could afford to purchase bikes for their children.
Despite the mild weather and <U+FB02>at topography, for all but few
inhabitants bicycling is no longer considered an option, due to
the heavy traf<U+FB01>c. In addition, there has been an alarming increase
in obesity rates (with a prevalence of 22% in men and 31% in
women), including childhood obesity (3.8% among 9–10 year old
children), and a decrease in physical activity (Shapo et al., 2003;
Hyska et al., 2009; Shapo et al., 2004), which may be related to
the ever greater car dependence and the conversion of neighborhood 
parks into building lots and parking lots.
Children are particularly exposed to the risk of accidents in a
frenetic city like Tirana, which does not have an appropriate pedestrian 
and cyclist infrastructure, nor suf<U+FB01>cient traf<U+FB01>c lights or road
signs. The Albanian Institute of Public Health has reported that
traf<U+FB01>c fatalities cause 13% of children’s deaths in Tirana (Gazeta
Panorama, 8 June 2009). Drivers’ mistakes cause about half of child
injuries and deaths (Qiriako et al., 2008). While road traf<U+FB01>c crashes
are a leading cause of child fatalities in Europe, children living in
low and middle income countries have a 1.6 times higher risk of
dying from road traf<U+FB01>c injury compared with children from higher
income countries (WHO, 2008). The Tirana Directorate of Public
Schools has repeatedly issued press releases in order to draw
attention to the high accident risks faced by children in inner-city
schools and to the need for traf<U+FB01>c calming devices near schools
(Fig. 1). High traf<U+FB01>c levels around schools in the morning and
afternoon peak have led to the mistaken belief that most children
commute by car.
Recently, steps have been taken to deal with urban traf<U+FB01>c and
transport issues. Curb ramps for the handicapped and speed bumps
are being installed, and a few streets in the center have been

converted to exclusive pedestrian use. But existing plans for the
creation of an extensive network of exclusive bus and bike lanes
have been slow to materialize. The City has announced that it will
take steps to promote active school travel in the future. However,
low budgets and an extremely politicized planning environment
dominated by political parties are barriers to carrying out sustainable 
urban transport planning.

4.1. School access

In Albania, the public sector is still the main provider of educational 
services. In Tirana the total student population in public
9-grade schools (ages 6–15) is approximately 50,500. There are
62 public and 42 private 9-grade schools. No data is available on
the number of students in the private schools, but this group is
small in size relative to the public schools. The size of the public
9-grade schools varies substantially. Older schools in more central
locations accommodate as many as 1500 students, while some
newer schools have only 200–300 students. The number of female
students is only slightly lower than the number of male students
(47% vs. 53%) (City of Tirana, 2012).
It must be noted that Albania has a relatively young population,
with children under 15 constituting nearly one <U+FB01>fth of the population 
in Tirana. Therefore, Tirana houses a higher proportion of
school-age children than in most European cities. The substantial
in-migration combined with scarce public resources to build new
schools and hire additional teaching staff has affected the quality
of education. In public schools the average classroom size is 32–
33 students. The new Tirana master plan foresees the construction
of a few new public schools in areas where they are missing; also,
renovation projects for existing schools are ongoing (City of Tirana,
2012). The overcrowding in public schools in addition to a growing
middle income population is leading to increasing enrollment of
children from higher income households in private schools, which
offer better facilities and higher teacher-student ratios.
While the location of public schools has been traditionally
determined by the City of Tirana based on service radii, private
schools follow a market based approach, choosing to locate either
(a) in smaller buildings in higher income areas, or (b) on spacious,
less expensive lots in suburban areas. Often they offer door-to-door
shuttle services for the transport of students, especially when
located outside the center.
However, school access is generally adequate and schools are
well distributed, especially in the inner city (Fig. 2). During enrollment 
public schools typically prioritize their spaces for children
living in proximity of the school. Truancy is low in public schools
(typically in the range of 1%) and, according to Tirana Directorate
of Education of<U+FB01>cials, is seldom the result of poor physical access
(i.e. home-school distance) to schools (Tirana Directorate of
Education, 2012). Socio-economic data on 29 public schools available 
at the Tirana Directorate of Education indicates that child poverty 
is substantial. On average, 10% of the students live under the
minimum standard but this <U+FB01>gure is as high as 20–30% in some
more peripheral schools. Single-parent households and being
orphaned are poverty risk factors, which affect up to 10% of the
student population. Children from Roma families, who constitute
less than 5% of the total, are also very likely to suffer from poverty
and marginalization, and exhibit high school dropout rates. They
are clustered in a few schools, with minimal numbers in others
(Tirana Directorate of Education, 2012). Disability limits school
access too, due to a combination of factors, including poor handicapped 
access in city streets and within schools, lack of special
education staff, and a widespread mentality among parents that
it is best to keep handicapped children at home in order to protect
them. In Tirana there are 1580 handicapped children but less than

half (43%) attend 9-grade schools (Save the Children, 2010; AFRPD,
2005).

5. Study design, data, and method

Two levels are taken into consideration in the present study:
the family level (micro-level) and the built environment level
(macro-level), based on the social-ecological theoretical model
constructed by Bronfenbrenner (1994) and Sallis et al. (2008).
Interactions between these two levels are accounted for by including 
variable sets from both in a regression model. The choice of
variable sets is based on the following hypotheses:

Variable set: gender, child’s age, parental age, birth order, number 
of siblings, parents divorced. The hypothesis is that these
variables implicitly determine the child’s freedom at the family
level, with male children, older children, non-<U+FB01>rstborn children,
children with siblings, and children of divorced parents walking
to school more often than others.
 Variable set: parental concern, parental perception of distance,
reputation-conscious parents, protective parents, parents’
home-school travel behavior during childhood, and perceived
burden of child escorting activities. The hypothesis is that these
variables explicitly determine the child’s freedom at the family
level, thereby affecting the probability that the child walks to
school.
 Variable set: parents’ education, parents’ exposure to the news,
and parents’ familiarity with the city. The hypothesis is that the
children of parents who are more aware of urban dangers experience 
less freedom in home-school travel.
 Variable set: number of cars per household, household income,
and dual-earning households. The hypothesis is that children
from wealthier households are driven to school more often than
others.
 Variable set: travel time, travel distance, number of road crossings, 
and school location (dummy). The hypothesis is that
longer travel time, greater distance, more crossings, and a more
car-oriented location school setting reduce children’s chances of
walking to school.

The Tirana Directorate of Education allowed the surveyors to
arrange to have the teachers distribute the survey questionnaire
to the students in the 6th, 7th, and 8th grades in four selected
schools. The age range was selected after a few preliminary inquiries, 
which indicated that at this age children in Tirana start travelling
more autonomously.
All four schools included in the survey (‘‘E Kuqe’’, ‘‘Vasil Shan-
to’’, ‘‘Edit Durham’’, and ‘‘28 Nëntori’’) are relatively large, with a
student population ranging from 900 to 1400. They were selected
for this study because they are located in contrasting settings in
terms of neighborhood age, accessibility, and vehicular traf<U+FB01>c
exposure. School ‘‘E Kuqe’’ is located in a historic, densely-built,
peripherally located neighborhood, with predominately single
family housing and narrow roads. The school faces a traf<U+FB01>c road
albeit not a busy one. School ‘‘Vasil Shanto’’ is located in an inner
city neighborhood with mid-rise multi-family housing mostly built
during the communist era. The school faces a busy traf<U+FB01>c intersection. 
School ‘‘Edit Durham’’ is located in a highly desirable central
city neighborhood which includes communist-era mid-rise multifamily 
housing and high-rise condominium buildings built after
communism. The school is located in the neighborhood interior
on a small street. School ‘‘28 Nentori’’ is located in a peripheral
neighborhood with a housing mixture (mid-rise communist-era
multi-family housing and high-rise condominium buildings and
small single-family houses built after communism). The school sits
at the edge of a highway.

Questionnaires were distributed to students during class time,
with a request that they be <U+FB01>lled out at home by the parents.
Four-hundred-seventy-two completed questionnaires were collected 
in the schools a few days later, with a response rate of
34%. The questionnaire included inquiries about the child’s mode
of travel to and from school, as well as behavioral, demographic,
and environmental questions. Variables measured by the survey
are listed in the <U+FB01>rst column of Table 5. Most are binary variables
(no = 0, yes = 1), other variables are ordinal (representing a degree
or level, such as the level of parental concern), and some are continuous (such as age).

The survey responses were analyzed using descriptive statistics,
and a Pearson’s correlation matrix was applied to identify possible
relationships between variables. Based on the corresponding signi<U+FB01>cance 
thresholds, the surveyed literature, and our insights on
the urban fabric of Tirana and the travel patterns of its inhabitants,
a number of variables were selected to be included in a series of
logistic regression models. The dependent variable was whether
or not students walk to school. In each equation, we included
dummy variables that control for differences between the four
schools. These variables were unobserved by the independent variables. 
All interpretations derived from logistic regression results
are based on the observed odds ratio, which is represented by
exp(B). The odds ratio is the ratio between the odds of the child
walking and the odds of the child not walking, depending on the
ful<U+FB01>llment of the condition set by the considered (binary) predictor. 
In case of an ordinal predictor (instead of binary), the odds
ratio represents the change in odds that the child will be walking,
depending on a one level increase of the value of the considered
predictor.2 Two additional simple models were applied in order to

elucidate the possible causality between walking behavior and
obesity.

6. Findings and discussion

6.1. Descriptive statistics

We found that an overwhelming majority of students (78.9%)
walk to school; only 13.5% are driven to school, while bicycling
and bus use are minimal. Similar results were obtained from a survey 
in two 9-grade schools in Shkodra, a smaller city in Northern
Albania (Mobalb, 2012). The proportions of students walking is
exceptionally high compared to Western countries.
The sample included 55.7% of boys and 44.3% of girls, with an
average age of about 12. Overall, 12.7% of the surveyed families
stated that their income is below average, 71.8% stated that their
income is average, and 15.5% stated that it is above average.3 The

share of families that own at least one car is 60.5%. Tables 1–4 present 
descriptive statistics of children’s home-school travel.
Home-school distances and travel times in our sample are relatively 
short (61.3% of students live less than 900 m from their
school and 87.0% travel to school in less than half an hour). Often,
schools can be reached by walking on sidewalks and through
neighborhood streets. Many students, particularly girls, walk to
school as part of a larger group of schoolmates, especially if they
have to cross major traf<U+FB01>c roads on the way.4
We found overpowering concerns among parents in regards to
traf<U+FB01>c accidents and kidnapping or harassment on the child’s
way to school, which mirror the <U+FB01>ndings of international studies.
While traf<U+FB01>c accidents present a real problem, child abduction is
a rare occurrence in Tirana. In the future, parental concerns over
factual and perceived dangers could lead to a situation in which
more parents drive their children to school as incomes and car
ownership increase.
Only a small percentage of Tirana’s schoolchildren is obese: 4.4%
reported by parents in our study and 3.8% according to 2009 data for
children aged 9–10 (Hyska et al., 2009). On the other hand, the proportion 
of children who are overweight is on the rise, standing at
18.1% among children aged 9–10 in 2009 (Hyska et al., 2009).5 We
asked parents whether they thought their child is obese, but did not
take anthropometric measurements (height and weight). The study
by Hyska et al. (2009) relied on anthropometric measurements.
According to our data, children who are driven to school are
more likely to be obese compared to those who walk. Also, they

usually are in higher-income families, live farther from the school,
and typically one or more major traf<U+FB01>c roads (as indicated by
parents) are present between their home and school. However,
home-school distances of less than one kilometer are too short to
have a large impact on daily exercise levels, and that diet (richer
in wealthier, car-owning families) is more likely to be the main
contributor to obesity.
Not asking separate questions about the morning and afternoon
trip is a signi<U+FB01>cant omission of the present study. Other researchers 
are encouraged to examine the morning and afternoon trip separately 
in future work on school travel in Albania and elsewhere in
Eastern Europe. Generally, we would expect walking rates to be
higher in the trip from school because it takes place while parents
(or at least fathers, who are most likely to drive), are still at work.
In the morning driving parents can drop off children on the way to
work so the number of children being driven might be higher then.

6.2. Correlation and regression analysis

Table 5 contains selected correlation coef<U+FB01>cients and
corresponding signi<U+FB01>cance levels, stressing children’s school travel

mode and family and route characteristics. Only statistically significant 
correlations are reported. Table 6 shows the results, including
odds ratios, signi<U+FB01>cances, and pseudo-R-squared, of three logistic
regression equations with ‘‘child walks to school’’ as a dependent
variable, and two equations with ‘‘child is obese’’ as a dependent
variable. Since the signi<U+FB01>cance levels of some of the explanatory
variables differ between car-owning households and carless households, 
a distinction was made between these two groups.
The correlation analysis reveals that walking to school is negatively 
associated with (a) car ownership and household income,
(b) the presence of major road crossings on the way to school, and
(c) physical distance, travel time, and perception of distance to
school. Gender did not have a signi<U+FB01>cant impact on walking rates
but it had an impact on children’s autonomy, with girls more likely
to be escorted to school. Also, the data suggests (though not at a

statistically signi<U+FB01>cant level) that girls do not cycle and use public
transport less frequently, which is compensated by some additional
car use. These <U+FB01>ndings indicate that in Tirana, as elsewhere, parents
have a more protective attitude towards girls. However, girls’
walking rates are exceptionally high, which might be explained by
Tirana’s relatively high gender equality inherited from communism.
The number of siblings and the birth order do not have signi<U+FB01>cant
correlations with the mode choice.
Children are more likely to be driven to school if: (a) their family 
is wealthier and owns a car (car ownership is positively correlated 
with household income), (b) major road crossings are
present on the way to school, or (c) the school is, or is perceived
to be, farther from home (in terms of time and distance). Children
who travel by bus are also more likely to live farther from the
school and encounter major road crossings on the way. Conversely,
with increasing home-school distance, the likelihood of having to
cross major traf<U+FB01>c roads increases as well. Home-school distance
and household wealth are not correlated because the city includes
a social mix, as mentioned.
Children are less likely to travel to school unaccompanied if: (a)
there are major road crossings on the way to school, (b) they are
girls, (c) the travel time to school is longer, (d) the parents are
highly concerned about child safety and comfort on the way to
school, and (e) when the parents are generally more protective.
Parents’ protective attitude was measured by asking if (a) they
allow the child to stay home alone for a few hours, (b) they allow
the child to play outside with other children, and (c) they know at
all times what their child is doing. About half of the surveyed parents 
are very concerned about the daily school trip of their child.
Group walk, short home-school distance, and the increasing age
of the child mitigate parental concerns. Parents experience driving
their child to school as much more of a burden compared to walking 
their child to school; this is possibly explained by the fact that
women are less likely to drive in Tirana (Pojani, 2011a). No differences 
appear if parents are more or less educated and/or conscious

about how they are perceived by other parents and teachers if they
do not accompany their children.
The <U+FB01>rst regression model, in which all households are included
(Table 6.1), reveals that both home-school distance and car ownership 
are main factors in determining whether a child walks to
school or not. Every additional ten minutes of travel time to school
reduces the odds of the child walking to 48%. The presence of a car
in the family reduces the odds of a child walking to school to 40%.
The strong reduction of odds has to do with the probability that
children are driven to school (i.e. choose the alternative mode),
thus capturing the effect of car ownership. As seen in Table 2, only
4% of children in carless families are driven to school, while in car
owning families this <U+FB01>gure is <U+FB01>vefold. Meanwhile, the percentage
of children who walk in carless families is 89.1% compared to
74.1% in car-owning families. Such high rates of walking, even
among students whose parents own cars, are unusual in most
European cities, and warranted further investigation. Therefore
the regression model was repeated once for carless households
and once for car-owning households.
In carless households, distance appears to be the only determinant 
in the choice to walk to school (Table 6.2). In car-owning
households, by contrast, not only distance but also income, the
presence of major traf<U+FB01>c road, and the level of parental concern
play a role in the decision to drive children to school (Table 6.3).
An increase in the level of income results in a reduction of the odds
of the child walking to school to 33%. Major road crossings are
present along the way to school for most children: only 25.3% do
not need to cross major roads, while 51.9% must cross at least
one and 22.8% are faced with two or more (as reported by parents).
With every additional major road crossing along the way, the odds
of the child walking to school are reduced to 39%. Parental concern

over safety is expressed in three levels (1 = unconcerned; 2 = average 
concern; 3 = very concerned). We observe that an increase in
the level of concern reduces the odds of the child walking to school
to 47%, compared to a lower level of concern.
In regards to health outcomes, in car-owning households obesity 
appears to be in<U+FB02>uenced by walking behavior – i.e. it is lower if
the child walks to school (Table 6.4). In contrast, in carless households 
there was no signi<U+FB01>cant correlation between obesity and
walking rates (Table 6.5). This might indicate that there are other
unhealthy patterns which commonly accompany bringing children
to school by car.
An analysis based on non-observed differences between the
schools reveals that children attending schools ‘‘E Kuqe’’ and ‘‘Vasil
Shanto’’, especially the latter, are signi<U+FB01>cantly less likely to walk
than children who attend schools ‘‘Edit Durham’’ and ‘‘28 Nentori’’.
Only 66% of students at ‘‘Vasil Shanto’’ walk to school while 21%
are driven by car and 13% go by bus. This difference may be
explained by the location of the school relative to road infrastructure, 
discussed earlier. We hypothesize that income levels may also
play a role but our data is not detailed enough to con<U+FB01>rm this.

7. Conclusion

This study found that an overwhelming majority of students,
including those from car-owning families, walk to school, while
bicycling and bus use are minimal. This <U+FB01>nding is impressive in
view of the situation in most other European cities. Some of our
other <U+FB01>ndings on factors affecting the modal choice for the school
commute (distance and urban environment) con<U+FB01>rmed the results
of prior studies. One contrast with prior studies was that socio-economic 
background played a role only for car-owning families.

Many surveyed variables, including gender, family composition,
certain parental attitudes, familiarity with the city, or exposure
to the news (broadcasting single cases of child adductions and
other unlikely perils) did not yield statistically signi<U+FB01>cant results.
Obesity, which is the focus of many international studies, did not
emerge as a signi<U+FB01>cant issue.
Students that walk to school do so more often as part of a larger
group of schoolmates, attend schools that are located relatively
near their house, are faced with relatively few major traf<U+FB01>c road
crossings during their journey, and are from families that are less
likely to own a car. Students who are driven to school usually have
higher-income families and live farther from the school. The prevalence 
of group walk is another unique <U+FB01>nding, which could be
harnessed to mitigate future travel behavior change.
These <U+FB01>ndings demonstrate that active school travel is associated 
with environmental characteristics. For children from carless
families, travel time is the only explanatory variable in mode
choice. Although Tirana’s high residential density and compactness
has some environmental drawbacks, it is positive in that it allows
for students living in close proximity of each other and of the
schools. A high number of school-age residents compared to the
rest of Europe and the <U+FB01>ne-grained pattern of the urban public
school network (at least in the inner city) contributes to the short
distances between residences and schools. Many children are able
to join a friend or group of friends for the home-school journey,
thus mitigating parental concerns over safety. These circumstances
are replicable in urban settings but not in low-density suburban
environments.
On the other hand, the presence of a car in the family appears to
be the chief predictor of the likelihood that a child will be driven to
school. Car ownership strongly correlates with household income
and, with a growing economy, it is expected to increase. This represents 
a potential threat to the livability and safety of the city and
it might cause a drop in walking-to-school rates, with more children 
becoming car dependent. In addition, current, heavy and
uncontrolled car traf<U+FB01>c in proximity of schools is a deterrent to
active school travel and child independence, and makes the experience 
of those who walk much less pleasant. We found that, in
car-owning families, the perception of danger and the household
income play a role in children’s mode choice for the commute.
Safety concerns appear to be typical across cultures.
To maintain the current walking rates in Tirana, our main public
policy suggestions are (1) the introduction of traf<U+FB01>c calming and
control devices within a determined radius of 9-grade schools,
e.g. 600 m, as nearly half of the surveyed students live within that
distance, and (2) the promotion of semi-formal ‘‘walk-share’’ or
‘‘walking school bus’’ groups of schoolmates walking to school.
Awareness-raising of parents and teachers on the real and perceived 
dangers, as well as bene<U+FB01>ts, of walking trips to school would
be another important element of these schemes, which could be
implemented by means of School Travel Plans.6 Also, perceptions
of car use among parents, as well as the population at large, as being
anti-social need to be enhanced. These relatively modest policies are
feasible in the context of Tirana.
Longer-term challenges, which require stronger political will
and much greater funding, are the containment of peri-urban
sprawl and the management and restriction of car travel in general.
A lack of transport policies that prioritize pedestrians and cyclists
might lead af<U+FB02>uent parents to prohibit their children from walking
to school. Transport and education policy must come together to