Analyzing the impact of neighborhood safety on active school travels
Ali Shamshiripoura , Ramin Shabanpoura, Nima Golshania, Abolfazl (Kouros) Mohammadiana, and
Parisa Shamshiripourb
                                                                                      
Childhood obesity has become a serious public health challenge during the past few decades, calling 
for policies to incorporate physical activity into students’ routines. This study is an effort to       
contribute to the current literature of school travels by analyzing how improving safety of different 
neighborhoods in Chicago, Illinois would encourage students toward shifting to active modes,
Active travel; crime rate;
and how this interrelationship is affected by the severe weather conditions during the cold winters 
of the region. The results are complemented by multiple sensitivity analyses to quantify how       
these shifts would help different students burn extra walking calories (i.e. the extra calories each   
student burns due to walking more). We estimate multiple discrete continuous extreme value
models to understand how flexible a student is in combining his/her most preferred transportation 
mode with other choices. Various sources of inter-personal heterogeneity are also captured
by using a latent-classification framework as well as differentiating the before-school from afterschool 
trip chains to consider the behavioral distinction, explicitly. Several explanatory variables
are incorporated into the models, including socio-demographics of students and their household,
land-use, crime prevalence, and seasonal/weather conditions. Per the results, improving safety of
Chicago from its current condition to the national median, would encourage students to be up to
40% more active. This extra active travel demand would provide obese students aged 14–18 with
18% of the calorie burn they need to lose weight to the obesity cutoff and 13% of the calorie
burn required for losing weight from the obesity cutoff to overweight.

1. Introduction                                                                 
										
There is alarming evidence suggesting childhood obesity as a
										
major health priority worldwide. In the United States, percentage 
of obese children aged 12–19 has doubled since                          
1980s (Ogden et al., 2016) and percentage of under-12 students 
with an extreme obesity diagnosis has significantly                       
raised (Ogden et al., 2016). Obesity can result in immediate                    
physical and psychological damage in children as well as                        
long-term health conditions by, inter alia, increasing cardiovascular 
risks and diabetes in adulthood (Griffiths, Parsons,                   
& Hill, 2010; Jelalian & McCullough, 2012; Must, Hollander,                     
& Economos, 2006; Puhl & Luedicke, 2012). Weight gain/                          
loss and energy balance are multi-parametric factors, especially 
for children,1 as studied by a profound portion of the                   
public health literature (Anderson & Butcher, 2006; Davison                     
& Birch, 2001).                                                                     
Important action plans have been proposed accordingly.                      
The Institute of Medicine Committee on Prevention of                            
Obesity in Children and Youth has developed a plan emphasizing 
on prevention as a key strategy to reduce childhood                      
obesity in the United States (Kraak, Liverman, & Koplan,                        
2005). Nutrition assistance programs, broad areas of                            

research, agricultural policies, highway design and safety
regulations, state and community grant programs, and
multidisciplinary surveillance systems are the core critical
elements of this action plan to prevent obesity as a national
priority. Plan of Action for the Prevention of Obesity in
Children and Adolescents (PAHO) also highlights a multisectoral 
life-course approach for increasing intake of nutritious 
foods and improving physical activity (Plan of Action
for the Prevention of Obesity in Children & Adolescents,
2014). Furthermore, the Safe Routes to School (SRTS) is a
national-level program designed to encourage students to
engage in active school travels by enforcement tools, incentives, 
and/or addressing the barriers of walking/biking for
children. A key dimension of SRTS is to promote incorporation 
of physical activities into the daily routines of children
(Hill, Wyatt, & Peters, 2012; Spiegelman & Flier, 2001).
Active school commutes among the various types of
physical activity have received special recognition in the literature 
due to the broad range of children being involved in
such activity (Bond Brill, Perry, Parker, Robinson, &
Burnett, 2002; Jauregui, Medina, Salvo, Barquera, & Rivera-Dommarco, 
2015; Larouche, Faulkner, Fortier, & Tremblay,
2014; Services, 2008). According to the Center of Disease

Control and Prevention (CDC), such commutes provide
equal opportunities, in the sense that even students with
limited athletic inclinations and those who cannot afford
gyms are encouraged to be physically active (Services, 2008).
The present article focuses on the transportation-behavior
aspects of active school commutes, to further analyze how
the public tendency towards such commutes could be
manipulated by the city officials. We focus on obesity of
children aged 6–12 and 12–18, as two groups of the society
calling for effective, immediate, and long-term plans to guarantee 
a healthy future life. Although children are by nature
attracted to physical activities such as walking, biking, and
running, it still remains a challenge to promote active school
trips among them (Services, 2000). Various factors are
believed to be influential, among which safety concerns—of
the children and their parents—stand out. In fact, not only
would not walking/biking to school be attractive in an
unsafe setting, but also it might not be taken as a feasible
action at all. Following is a brief review of the different
aspects of school travel safety as discussed in the literature.
The major attention in the literature is focused on the
safe interactions between students and the conflicting traffic
vehicular flow (Deka & Von Hagen, 2015; Hopkins &
Mandic, 2017; Kerr et al., 2006; Moniruzzaman & Farber,
2018; Rodriguez & Vogt, 2009). Such interactions mostly
take effect from urban settings (e.g., street connectivity indices) 
and are well-studied to this point. In addition, a stream
of research is triggered recently, defining school trip safety
in terms of crime prevalence and supporting the significance
of accounting for it (Kamargianni, Dubey, Polydoropoulou,
& Bhat, 2015; Ma, Xiong, Wang, & Xie, 2018;
Woldeamanuel, 2016).
Our main focus in the present article is to have a closer
look into the role of crime prevalence in the context of the
Chicago metropolitan area, Illinois. Regarding the safety
challenges of the region, recent data released by the
Uniform Crime Reporting Program (Federal Bureau of
Investigation) shows that the city of Chicago is among the
least safe cities nationwide. The city is less safe than 89% of
American cities. Furthermore, violent crime rate in the city
stands at 9.08 (per 1000 residents), as compared to the
national median crime rate of 3.8 (“Chicago Crime Rates
and Statistics - NeighborhoodScout,” 2017). We also account
for the safety challenges caused by the drastic weather conditions 
during the winter period. Our empirical evidence
supports the significant role of the weather conditions,
as well.
Adopting advanced statistical modeling approaches, we
explore how critical it could be to accommodate policies to
increase the crime safety in the residence of students. The
main hypothesis is that children living in unsafe neighborhoods 
are generally more reluctant towards active travel. In
more details, we explore how children’s active school travels

is a function of violent-crime prevalence in the neighborhood 
where they reside and how this relationship is affected
by the weather conditions. Using the weight-for-age charts
proposed by CDC, we also explore how policies for improving 
safety of Chicago to the national median, contributes to

the students’ energy balance in the form of extra walking
calorie burns (i.e. the extra calories burned due to walking
more) for each student.
Two key terms need especial attention in the above statement: 
extra walking calorie burn and each student. We limit
the scope of the present research to the extra walking calories 
(as compared to the full calorie burn), for the sake of
availability of a comprehensive-enough dataset. The full
entanglement of the relationship requires a longitudinal
dataset that contains detailed information on the householdlevel 
transportation behavior of the children and their families, 
weather conditions and crime records, the socio-demographics 
like age, gender, income, membership in gyms, and
not least, genetic factors, weight, height, metabolic factors,
the attitudes towards playing indoor versus outdoor in play
grounds, etc. Limiting scope of the research helps us legitimately 
assume that putting aside all the individual-specific factors 
mentioned above does not harm the validity of our
results, since those factors all cancel out when focusing on
each student separately and looking merely into the extra
energy that he/she consumes while having the peace of mind
to walk for longer distances in the neighborhood.
Remainder of this article is organized as follows. Next
section reports on a comprehensive review of the literature
conducted to understand the context and to choose proper
analysis methods. As discussed in that section, we adopt the
multiple discrete continuous extreme value (MDCEV) (Bhat,
2008) econometrics modeling approach to account for the
satiation effects (i.e. students loose interest towards, for
example, walking as they walk for longer distances). Next, in
Section 3, we discuss the different sources of data we used
in this study. The econometrics modeling approach is elaborated 
in detail in Section 4, and the model specification and
the estimation results are reported in Section 5. Readers
interested mostly in our results can skip these two sections
and reach Section 6 where we discuss the immediate findings 
of the study. In Section 7, we take a step forward and
simulate the outcome of policies to make Chicago safer, in
the forms of: (1) extra active travels before and after school,
and (2) the individual-level extra walking calorie burns discussed 
above. The article concludes in Section 8 with summarizing 
findings of the study.

2. Literature review

A comprehensive review of the literature helped us gain
insight on the context, find the gaps, and adopt a suitable
analysis method. This section is dedicated to a brief discussion 
on the take-aways from the previous studies in two
fields: (1) transport mode choice behavior and (2)
Childhood obesity as a major health priority.

2.1. Transport mode choice

Selected studies in the transport mode choice literature are
summarized in Table 1. Studies in this table are chosen to
cover a wide range of analysis features, focusing on the
mode choice.

Regarding the choice set formation, we noted that a
majority of studies on school travels have either developed
models on a limited subset of modes and studied the rest
through descriptive analyses (Helbich, 2017; Johansson,
Laflamme, & Hasselberg, 2012; Larsen et al., 2009; Leslie,
Kremer, Toumbourou, & Williams, 2010; Rodriguez & Vogt,
2009; Van Dyck, De Bourdeaudhuij, Cardon, & Deforche,
2010), or merely focused their attention on active modes as
a binary choice (Broberg & Sarjala, 2015; Deka & Von
Hagen, 2015; Mitra, Buliung, & Roorda, 2010). Another
dimension of the problem, which often-times is ignored, is
the interrelationships between accompaniment and mode in
a school trip. Parents are expected to have less safety concerns 
while escorting their child to school, especially when it
comes to younger students’ travels. Although the limited
choice set in most of the studies cited above is an intrinsic
challenge of GPS tracking data used by them, we have more
freedom in the present research, thanks to using travel diaries. 
In this sense, the models developed in this article recognize:

 Three accompaniment styles (i.e., alone, having one
accompany, and having more than one accompany), as
well as
 Four modes of travel (i.e., active, transit, auto, and school
bus) to form a comprehensive choice set.

With regards to the statistical modeling approach, we
used the MDCEV model (Bhat, 2008), despite majority of

school trip studies that stick to single-discreteness choice
models such as Multinomial Logit (MNL) and Nested logit
(NL). As a principle of the utility theory (Seager, 1917), people 
generally get less inclined towards waking, biking, taking
a bus, etc., as they go farther distances by the mode. This
principal behavioral concept is also referred to as the satiation 
effects and is the main driver behind choosing different
alternatives at the same time. Put differently, in such choice
situations, a rational decision maker oftentimes chooses a
bundle of alternatives instead of sticking to one insatiably.
Conventional choice models like MNL are mainly proposed
to model situations of single-discreteness where only one
alternative is being selected. Relaxing this limitation, the
novel closed form formulation of MDCEV allows for analyzing 
how flexible a student is in combining his/her most-preferred 
mode with other choices.
Also, we used a latent classification framework to
endogenously capture the potential heterogeneity in mode
choice behavior of students (Greene & Hensher, 2003). The
mode choice decision is generally argued to be subject to
considerable degrees of heterogeneity (Shabanpour,
Golshani, Derrible, Mohammadian, & Miralinaghi, 2017;
Vij, Carrel, & Walker, 2013). In the context of students’
mode choice, however, few studies could be found taking
the heterogeneity into account explicitly in a unified model
structure. Inspiring from literature, also, travels to and from
school are analyzed separately (Mitra et al., 2010;
Schlossberg, Greene, Phillips, Johnson, & Parker, 2006;
Wilson, Marshall, Wilson, & Krizek, 2010; Yarlagadda &

Srinivasan, 2008). These two portions of a student’s daily
travel pattern are argued to be fundamentally different in
nature; commute to school is, by definition, a travel towards
a mandatory activity with inflexible start time, while getting
back home is a travel towards a more enjoyable activity
which probably provides the student with more peace of
mind and flexibility.
We incorporate into the models a set of different predictors 
including socio-demographic characteristics of students
and their households, land-use, crime safety, and seasonal/
weather conditions. Age, grade, gender, household composition 
indices (e.g., presence or number of siblings), vehicle
and license ownership, and household income are among
the most recognized socio-demographic variables in the context 
(Kamargianni et al., 2015; Mitra et al., 2010; Sidharthan,
Bhat, Pendyala, & Goulias, 2011; Wen et al., 2008; Zhang,
Yao, & Liu, 2017). Furthermore, frequently used land-use
variables, can be categorized into home-school distance
(either with respect to the mileage of travel or the travel
time), street connectivity measures (e.g., intersection density,
road density), population or residential density, and urbanicity 
(Helbich, 2017; Johansson et al., 2012; Mitra et al., 2010;
Woldeamanuel, 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). Safety indices of
the student’s pathway to school are also commonly recognized 
as influential variables in their mode choice behavior
(Johansson et al., 2012; Kamargianni et al., 2015; Rodriguez
& Vogt, 2009; Wen et al., 2008).

2.2. Childhood obesity as a major health priority

Mounting previous evidence, 22 million children under
5 years of age are overweight internationally (Deckelbaum &
Williams, 2001). Much research has been devoted to assessing 
the impacts and comorbidities of childhood obesity.
Previous evidence suggests that childhood obesity is a risk
factor of future chronic diseases (e.g., high blood pressure,
hyperlipidemia, or elevated insulin levels; Freedman, Dietz,
Srinivasan, & Berenson, 1999). Hence, there is rising concern 
to control childhood obesity by providing easy and
accessible strategies in community level (e.g., active school
trips, nutrition improvement, and physical activities) and
improving social media focusing on the issue.
Obesity is a multifactorial health issue affected by genetic
background, nutrition, age, gender, parents’ lifestyles, and
school policies. In this sense, there is no consensus on defining 
childhood obesity. Underwater weighing (densitometry),
multi-frequency bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA), and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are methods to measure
body fat percentage for research applications. In clinical
environment, anthropometrics aids gain an indirect estimate
of body fat. Reviewing the literature, BMI and weight-forage 
are two important anthropometric parameters that could
be used in our research. Different studies suggested diverse
BMI cutoff points for defining obesity among youth
(Flodmark, Lissau, Moreno, Pietrobelli, & Widhalm, 2004;
Ghosh, 2014; Nawab, Khan, Khan, & Ansari, 2014). Yet,
BMI is believed to be an inaccurate estimate of child obesity,
due to physiologic changes during the growth period.

Another strategy to gain a more robust view of childhood
obesity is to use weight-for-age charts released by CDC. As
reported by previous research, the 90th and 75th percentiles
are appropriate cutoffs to define children as obese or overweight, 
respectively (Gamliel, Ziv-Baran, Siegel, Fogelman, &
Dubnov-Raz, 2015). We adopted this metric.
Three prevention strategies can be implemented to lower
childhood obesity. Primordial prevention mainly focuses on
maintaining healthy lifestyle (weight-for-age < 75th percentile). 
Primary prevention helps avoiding at risk population to
become obese (weight-for-age 75th to 90th percentile) and
secondary prevention aims to reduce comorbidities of obesity 
(weight-for-age > 90th percentile). The present research
focuses on the last two categories.

3. Data preparation and sample formation

The main source of data used in this study is the Travel
Tracker Survey, hosted by Chicago Metropolitan Agency for
Planning. The survey gathers travel information of 23,808
individuals in 10,552 households, among which around 10%
are school children aged 6–18. After extensive data cleaning,
the final sample used for the analysis contains information
of 2703 students in this age range. This sample is, then,
enriched by adding built-environment data at the census
tract level to reflect land-use settings in students’ residential areas.
Although the survey includes diverse demographic attributes 
and travel information, it does not explicitly collect
travel distance information (instead, straight line distances
are computed and reported as proxies). To obtain more
accurate proxies, we have employed Google Maps’ Distance
Matrix API (“Distance Matrix API”, 2018). Distance Matrix
API is a service provided by Google Maps that facilitates
systematic route choice queries. The API responds to queries
of origin–destination with details of the best route. We

developed a computer code in Python 3 to go over the trip
legs of students in the sample, query each record from the
API, and extract the corresponding travel time and distance.
Using a similar approach, we also extract from the API the
walking distances between students’ home and school locations 
based. That is, this variable is generated for a hypothetical 
walking travel from home directly to school,
choosing the route suggested by the Google Maps Distance
Matrix API. Origin and destination of 6.3% of the trip legs
are reported to be the same in the survey, resulting in zero
travel distances returned by the API. In such cases, the corresponding 
travel distances are imputed using the method of
stochastic regression (Little & Rubin, 2014), incorporating
other travel- and individual-level information as predictors
of the regression. The variables used for imputation include
time of day, the straight-line distances as reported in the
raw dataset, and socio-demographics, among others.
The final estimation sample is formed by aggregating different 
mode-escort combinations into eight choice alternatives, 
namely active but alone, active with one companion,
active with more than one companion, drive alone, being
the only passenger of a car, being part of a carpool, taking
transit, or riding school bus. Figure 1 presents the percent
of students who have chosen each mode-escort alternative in
their travel to/from school. The figure reveals that carpooling 
and school bus constitute more than 50% of the chosen
modes in both before-school and after-school tours. Another
insight from this Figure is that students are more likely to
walk from school to home than when heading to school. To
add more perspective, Figure 2 depicts the distribution of
active transport mileages of traveling to/from school.
Accordingly, students are also more likely to walk for longer
distances when they are heading back home compared to
when they are going to school. In Section 2.1, we provided
evidence from the literature regarding the distinction
between before- and after-school chains. Figures 1 and 2
also provide further insight on the importance of testing the

distinction, specifically, for our dataset. Such tests are conducted 
in Section 5. Please refer to that section for
more details.

4. Methodology for transport mode
choice modelling

This article adopts the latent-class modeling approach
(Greene & Hensher, 2003; Sobhani, Eluru, & Faghih-Imani,
2013) to control for the potential heterogeneity among students 
in their decisions regarding active travels. In this
framework, students are endogenously assigned to specific
classes, and for each class, a separate MDCEV (Bhat, 2008)
model is estimated.

4.1. Latent-Classification model

Let His denote the probability distribution function associated 
with individual i being a member of class s: A detailed
discussion on different His formulations can be found in
Greene and Hensher (2003). Following Sobhani et al. (2013),
we adopt the multinomial logit form in Equation (1), where
yi is a vector containing various attributes associated with
individual i; and ds is the vector of segment-specific coefficients 
corresponding to yi :


Also, let Pij js denote the likelihood that individual i demonstrates 
choice pattern j; given being a member of class s:
Having the class-membership and within-class choice probabilities 
specified, the overall likelihood of individual i choosing 
a choice pattern j can be written as:

4.2. MDCEV model

In some choice situations, the consumer demands for multiple 
goods given a limited budget, instead of an insatiable
desire on selecting one. Choosing among different modes of
travel is an example—one may imperfectly substitute one
mode for another. A student might be given a ride by his/
her parent to a safe zone close to school and walk rest of
the way. In this case, total mileage that the student travels
from home to school (or vice versa) is the budget, which is
split among auto and walk.
One popular method of analyzing such situations is
through applying Kuhn-Tucker (KT) conditions (Bhat, 2008;
Wales & Woodland, 1983). This method can be traced back
to the work of Wales and Woodland (1983) where the
authors proposed a likelihood function of multivariate normal 
integrals, resulting in computational difficulties that prevented 
the model from getting prevailing at the time (Bhat,
2008). Kim, Allenby, and Rossi (2002) advanced this
approach by incorporating a translated CES (i.e., Constant
Elasticity of Substitution) utility function, and employing a
simulation approach to approximate the integrals. Few other
studies have also applied similar approaches (see, e.g.,
Phaneuf, Kling, & Herriges, 2000; von Haefen, Phaneuf, &
Parsons, 2004). Bhat (2005) developed a novel closed-form
formulation, MDCEV, which was further enhanced by the
same author in 2008 (Bhat, 2008). Different specifications
have been proposed for each version of the model.

Following literature Castro, Eluru, Bhat, and Pendyala
(2011), Eluru, Pinjari, Pendyala, and Bhat, (2009), Pinjari
and Bhat, (2010a), and Rajagopalan, Pinjari, and Bhat,
(2009), we adopt the c-profile specification of the 2008 version 
for the present study.
Let Ck denote the mileage traveled by mode k, and U ðCÞ
denote the total utility that a student gains from choosing a
particular chain of modes (e.g., having someone give them a
ride, then walking for the last quarter mile). Then, the
             														
where ck is the translation parameter, which also alters for
satiation effects. Furthermore, wk is the baseline marginal                          
utility (at the point of zero consumption), which by definition, 
needs to be positive for all students. Equation 4 guarantees 
the positivity condition.
										
here, Z denotes the vector of explanatory variables, b is the                        
corresponding vector of coefficients, and ek denotes the                             
error term, which is assumed to follow an iid extreme value                          
distribution within each latent class.                                               
																					
4.3. Estimation technique                                                            
											
Expectation maximization (EM) is the technique mostly											
used in previous studies to overcome estimation difficulties										
of a discrete choice model with mixed error terms (Train,										
2009). EM starts by estimating the original log-likelihood by										
a simple-to-optimize function (i.e., the Expectation function)                           
and continuous to find its maximum in each iteration.                                
Then, the algorithm moves forward to ultimately find a                               
point sufficiently close to a stationary point in the log-likelihood 
function. However, this method has two main drawbacks: 
First, convergence rate of the method is very slow,                           
and second, it increases the chance of trapping in a local                           
optimum (Bhat, 1997; Zhang, Kuwano, Lee, &                                           
Fujiwara, 2009).                                                                     
To account for these concerns, inspiring from Bhat                              
(1997), we have used a simplified version of the HELPME                                  
algorithm (Shamshiripour & Samimi, 2017). The algorithm                              
starts by generating 15 random initial solutions around estimation 
results of the corresponding basic MDCEV (the single-class 
model), which are allowed to randomly fluctuate in                         
the domain of ½2  b to 2  b for the baseline marginal                            
utility parameters and ½0:4  c to 1:5  c for the translation                      
parameters. In addition to avoiding local optima, this 
                              
technique has also helped us to impose no restrictions to
any of the b parameters.

5. Transport mode choice model: Specification

We tested two different approaches for capturing the distinction 
between students’ travel behavior before and after
school. First, a model is developed for the entire home-tohome 
trip chain. In this model, the distinction between
before- and after-school tours is recognized by introducing a
The distinction of before- from the after-school trips is confirmed 
by the t-test conducted for the dummy variable’s
coefficient in the model. This model is then compared
against separate models for before-school and after-school
trip chains. The latter approach is found to offer more stable
and more accurate results; thus, the home-to-home model is
not reported. The distinction between before- and afterschool 
trips is also supported by these models, using the
likelihood ratio test.
Table 2 summarizes definition of various explanatory variables 
incorporated into the models, as well as their average
and standard deviation in the final estimation sample.
Also, number of classes is set to 3 based on the stability
of the results, and AIC and BIC indices. AIC and BIC values
are outlined in Tables 4 and 5. Per these values, the model
with three latent classes is superior to the 2-class model for
before-school and after-school trip chains. Similarly, the 4-class 
model structure is superior to the 3-class structure per
the AIC results. However, the 4-class structure is not considered 
a good model specification as it leads to unstable
results, in terms of both magnitude and sign of the
coefficients.
Table 3 outlines results of the latent-segmentation models, 
setting Class 1’s utility function as the base. The segment-specific 
models developed for before-school and after-school 
trip chains are respectively reported in Table 4 and
Table 5. The last column of these tables outlines average
parameter estimates calculated using the Bayesian formula
(Greene & Hensher, 2003). The reader may note that the
average values are not reported for translation parameters.

We avoid reporting the values to underline the fact that                             
those values are subject to enormous variations among                                
classes, making an average value lose its meaning.                                   
											
											
6. Transport mode choice model: Discussion
										
This section is structured to elaborate on the results outlined                      
in Tables 3, 4, and 5, with an emphasis on the transportation 
behavior. We first go over our findings regarding the                           
individual preferences in terms of baseline marginal utility                         
variables. The findings include the roles of socio-demographic 
variables, urban settings, and seasonal effects. After                       
that, we explain the modal satiation effects and marginal                            
utilities specific to each mode and class. At the end, the discussions 
in this section conclude with a simple simulation to                       
further disentangle the effects of the latent classification variables 
and study how they eventually affect the preferences                          
towards active modes of travel.                                                      										
											
6.1. Baseline marginal utility variables
                                             
The influence direction of socio-demographics (except                                
household-structure indicators), urban settings and land-use                         
variables, and seasonal effects are found to be consistent in                        
sign across different classes as well as for before- and after-school 
chains. These variables are discussed first, starting                         
with the student’s age. In addition to latent segmentation                              
model, this variable is also found to significantly influence                        
the mode choice behavior. Per results, students tend to walk                         
or bike alone to/from school as they age. This effect is specifically 
observed for the second and third classes. Older students 
of the third class are also found to lose interest in                          
accompanied active modes. Notably, students become more                              
inclined toward shifting to the drive-alone mode, as they                            
age. Number of vehicles per licensed driver in a household                           
is also confirmed to be influential. As the results show, students 
in households owning more vehicles are less likely to                          
walk (or bike) alone (observed for first and second classes)                         
or take transit (observed only for the second class).                                
Previous studies have concluded different results regarding 
structure of the student’s household (McDonald, 2008;                            
Mitra et al., 2010). We found household-structure                                    

coefficients to be subject to variations in sign across different 
classes, and in some instances, between before- and
after-school chains. The average Bayesian estimates are presented 
in Tables 4 and 5 to gain a general sense of these
variables’ influence direction. Per the average results, number 
of students in a household positively affects the probability 
of a carpooling trip to school. In case of after-school
chains, though, the relationship holds in the opposite direction. 
Furthermore, students who have more student siblings
are found to be more interested in active travels with more
than one companion. The reader may note that this effect is
consistent across different classes, and before-school versus
after-school chains. Although McDonald (2008) reported
similar results regarding influence of number of siblings,
Mitra et al. (2010) found no significant associations to students’ 
tendency to walk. Per our results, also, students of
households with more workers are less likely to have someone 
give them a ride from home to school, while being
more likely to do so for getting back home. Number of
non-students in the household who do not work is another
indicator of the household structure. The effect of this variable 
is observed to be consistent among before- and afterschool 
chains. As number of such individuals increases in a
household, it becomes more probable that a student of the
household takes an active journey to school while being
accompanied by others.
Coping with active modes of travel is also found to be
under influence of various urban settings, by previous
research (Johansson et al., 2012; Kamargianni et al., 2015;
Nelson, Foley, O’Gorman, Moyna, & Woods, 2008;
Schlossberg et al., 2006) and the current study. Intersection
density is an instance. Neighborhoods with higher intersection 
densities provide more safe zones (per unit of area) for
students to pass the street and, thereby, have a more flexible
route choice experience and safer journey to/from school
(Helbich et al., 2016; Schlossberg et al., 2006). In line with
this expectation, our results indicate that higher intersection
densities encourage students to have more walking/biking
school travels, either while they are alone (observed for first
and third classes) or when they are being accompanied by a
companion (observed only for the first class). Crime density
is another safety indicator considered in this study. Students

living in neighborhoods with higher crime densities are                              
found to be considerably less likely to go to/from school by                         
walking or biking when they are alone. This finding is consistent 
with results of previous studies (McDonald &                                 
Aalborg, 2009; Schlossberg et al., 2006; Woldeamanuel,                               
2016). Schlossberg et al. (2006), for instance, report significant 
relationships between parents’ fear of potential dangers                        
from strangers and their tendencies for allowing the child                           
for having an active school travel.                                                  
Per the results, students living in neighborhoods with                          
more individuals in their age (who are very likely to be                             

students too) also show more tendencies towards homeschool 
active travels with more than one accompanies. We
believe this is a significant finding, showing how influential
social networks could be in encouraging students to be
more active. Per this result, students having more opportunities 
to socialize with their neighbor fellows are also of
higher potentials of coping an active lifestyle. The results
also confirm the intuitive expectation that students get less
inclined towards walking (or biking) to/from school when
they live farther from school. Per the results, walking and
biking are also less expected during December, January, or

February when the weather gets severe. This relationship is                          
in line with results of Kamargianni et al. (2015) that argued                        
that students are more likely to be active in a 
sunny weather.                                                                       										
										
6.2. Tendency to combine modes                                                       
											
Students’ tendencies to combine a mode-accompaniment                                 
option with other options (i.e., Satiation effects) are summarized 
in Figure 3, separating before-school from afterschool chains. 
This figure is drawn for a hypothetical                               

student of each class, setting his/her baseline marginal utility
to unity. To produce comparable depictions, travel mileage
and total utility axes are shown, respectively, up to 20 miles
and 50 units for all active, and 100 miles and 200 units for
all non-active modes. As can be seen, most alternatives are
subject to considerable satiation variations across different
classes. For instance, for active travels with one accompany,
an almost-linear utility profile is estimated for the first class,
while the third class is assigned with a highly satiated profile. 
Such variations, indeed, underline importance of
accounting for the existing heterogeneity in mode choice
behavior of students.

According to Figure 3, furthermore, school bus and transit 
users are the least probable students to combine their
current choices with other modes (that could potentially be
walking or biking). This finding is not so surprising for the
school bus, as it can be thought of as a door-to-door mode
which eliminates the potentially active accesses and
aggresses. The transit network, on the other hand, has long
been argued to provide considerable potentials of encouraging 
users to adopt an active life style, due to the access/
egress portions which are often conducted by walk or bike
(Woldeamanuel, 2016). In this sense, this finding is worth
underscoring, since it indeed indicates that most student
users of the transit system are those who are not willing to
combine it with other modes, including walking and biking
(i.e., their origin and destinations are probably close to a
station). There are still considerable potentials of shifting
students living not-so-close to the transit stations to use this
mode, as well.

6.3. Latent classification variables

At the first glance, the results of latent classification variables 
indicate that mode choice behavior of students aged
less than 12 is different from older students. Also, we found
gender as a significant predictor of the latent classification
component. Living in high income households and living in
the city of Chicago are also found as sources of significant
behavioral variations. The results also confirm that students
behave differently during April and May, compared to other
times of school year.
These findings only serve as indications of influence, but
they are barely informative on the direction of the influence.
We calculate the pseudo elasticity values to determine how,
eventually, these variables would influence students’ tendencies 
towards active travels to/from school. Pseudo elasticity
of a dummy variable is defined as the percentage change in
the total active-commute mileage (either alone, or with one
or more accompany) as a result of changing state of the
variable from 0 to 1 (Train, 2004). The pseudo elasticity
estimates are calculated numerically using the prediction
algorithm which was originally proposed by Pinjari and
Bhat (2010b) for a simple MDCEV model and was later
expanded by Sobhani et al. (2013) for latent-class MDCEV
models. The algorithm is set to iterate 1000 times, each time
with a different set of simulated IID Extreme Value error
terms, and the results are averaged over the 1000 simulations. 
Then, the elasticity values are calculated for each of
the latent classification variables based on the average predictions, 
and the results are depicted in Figure 4.
Figure 4 shows elasticity estimates for home to school

and school to home tours. The results suggest that students
who live in the city of Chicago are about 16% (10%) more
active in their travels to (from) school compared to those
living in suburban areas. This finding is in line with the literature 
that evidences the higher vehicle ownership by
households living in suburban areas (Alemu & Tsutsumi,
2011) and the more sprawl development of the suburban
areas as compared to urban settings (Kuang, Chi, Lu, &

Dou, 2014). In accordance to the literature, our results also
depict that students who are members of higher-income
families are potentially less active in their travels between
home and school (McMillan, 2007). This could be attributed
to higher rates of automobile ownerships among higher
income households.
The elasticities further reveal that during April and May
students are slightly more active in home-school travels.
This distinction is probably attributed to both pleasant weather 
conditions and scenery in spring, which provides a suitable 
walking environment. It is argued in the literature that
attractiveness of a walking pathway has a significant potential 
of convincing people to walk instead of drive (Broberg
& Sarjala, 2015; Kerr et al., 2006).
The discussions in Section 6.1 reveal that older students
are more inclined towards both active (alone) and drive
modes for traveling to/from school. Therefore, the coefficients 
alone cannot explicitly identify whether older students
are more likely to choose active modes or driving. The sensitivity 
analyses in this section further add that as younger
students (6–12 years old) age they become slightly more
active (i.e., about 2% increase in active mode mileage for
traveling from home to school and 3% increase in traveling
from school to home). This could be either due to the vulnerability 
of younger students to safety threats, or their lack
of tolerance for walking high distances, which diminishes as
they grow older. On the other hand, the trend reverses after
the age of 12 (i.e., elasticity values are about 5% and 6%
for before-school and after-school travels) possibly due to
the capability of obtaining a driver’s license. These results in
fact underline the importance of promoting active living lifestyle 
among younger students to reduce the potential of
shifting to non-active school modes as they reach the legal
age of obtaining a driver’s license.

7. Policy implication: Enhancing safety in Chicago

In order to enhance the city of Chicago’s safety to reach the
national median, the violent crime rate should be reduced
by about 60%. This is while, per the results reported in
Section 6.1, students who are living in less safe neighborhoods 
are significantly less likely to go on active school
commutes. This section of the article is devoted to quantifying 
how the 60% improvement of crime density in the city
of Chicago would affect active school commute behavior of
its student residents. Also, we derive a linkage between daily
commutes and some health indicators to provide more tangible takeaways.

7.1. Active travel mileages

The prediction algorithm discussed in Section 6.1 is used
again to predict active travel mileages associated with 13
scenarios: the base condition (i.e., do nothing) and 12
improvement scenarios. Each improvement scenario assumes
enhancement of the previous state by a 5% reduction in
crime density. That is, the first scenario assumes that the
crime density is reduced to 95% of the base condition, the

second scenario assumes it is reduced to 90% of the base
condition, and so on. Our analyses show distinct travel patterns 
for residents of different parts of the city, and for different 
seasons. These distinctions are taken into account by
dividing students into eight different groups depending on
the month of travel and the base condition’s crime density

(i.e., the do-nothing scenario). The base condition’s crime
density (i.e., defined as number of criminal activities per the
unit area) is divided into four groups: extremely low crime
density (less than 0.05), low crime density (0.05–0.10), high
crime density (0.10–0.15), and extremely high crime density
(0.15 and above). These groups respectively constitute

83.0%, 7.5%, 5.3%, and 4.2% of the whole sample. Also, the
school year is divided into two sections as suggested by the
model specification: during December, January, or February
(the winter period), and rest of the year (non-winter).
Figure 5 depicts the percentage change in the overall active
travels for each group.
In overall, this figure reveals a growing pattern of
increase in the students’ propensities towards active modes
as a result of safety improvements. This trend is observed to
the point of a 55% improvement of crime densities. Further
safety improvements, however, would be associated with
lower rates of encouragement towards active travels.
According to this Figure, furthermore, students’ tendencies
towards active modes are considerably less sensitive to crime
density during December to February as compared to
warmer months of the school year. This is understandable
given the severe weather conditions during these months.
The severe weather conditions during December to February
would result in such a strong disutility that could overcome
the disutility caused by safety concerns. This pattern is especially 
observed in regions of the city that are flagged as
extremely low or low crime density, and understandably
diminishes in higher crime-density regions.
Per Figure 5(a), moreover, residents of extremely low
crime density regions (83% of the society) are more or less
inelastic to making the city safer—especially during the winter. 
Such an inelasticity makes sense given the fact that such
areas of the city are already safe enough to provide necessary 
peace of mind to their residents. Reducing the crime
density of these neighborhoods would barely increases students’ 
active-mode distance traveled by approximately 1.5%.
the latent classification model.

However, the safety improvements would considerably affect
the other 17% of the student society. It is estimated that by
improving safety of the city of Chicago from its current conditions 
to the national-level median, around 4% of the students 
(i.e., those who live in areas with extremely high
crime density) would become 40% more active in terms of
daily travel distance, while the whole 17% of students would
become at least 14% more active. Equivalently, the change
would result in an increase in daily walking times of about
21 minutes for about 4% of the students, and at least
8 minutes for the whole 17% of students (assuming an average 
walking speed of 3 miles per hour).

7.2. Extra walking calorie burn

In the previous section, we presented the policy implication
results in terms of the extra distances for which each student
would walks if Chicago were made safer. In this section, we
transformed those changes into the extra walking calories on
the individual basis. That is, for each and every student in
our sample, we first simulate the extra walking distance
associated with each safety-improvement scenario (as
explained in the previous section). Then, we use the weightfor-age 
charts proposed by CDC to transform the extra
walking distance into the extra walking calorie, for overweight 
and obese students. In accordance to the literature
(Gamliel et al., 2015), we assume the obesity and overweight
cutoffs to be, respectively, the 75th and 90th weigh-for-age
percentiles. Before moving on to more details, it should be
kept in mind that the results in this section should not be

interpreted as a representation of the whole pattern of calorie 
burn (which is also a function metabolic and genetic
factors, among the many others) of the students. We merely
derive a good proxy for how much more calorie each student 
burns while walking for the extra distance.
The calculations are designed to replicate the annual values. 
Walking calorie depends on speed and duration of the
walk, weight of the student, and the pathway’s grade (Glass,
Dwyer, Medicine, & Of, 2007; Margaria, Cerretelli, Aghemo,
& Sassi, 1963). We assume all active travels are walking;
walking speed of students is on average 3 miles per hour;
and all sidewalks are level. The calorie burns are calculated
accordingly (Glass et al., 2007) for six classes of students
(three age categories and three weight categories) living in
each of the four neighborhood types discussed in the previous 
section. The results are depicted in Figure 6.
According to Figure 6a, b, a 60% safety improvement is
not expected to be of great calorie burn benefits for residents 
of neighborhoods with low or extremely low crime
densities. However, this would not be the case for neighborhoods 
with higher rates of crime prevalence. As can be seen,
for neighborhoods with extremely high (high) crime rates,

the safety improvement results in an annual energy consumption 
of 7900 calories (5800 calories), for an obese student aged 14–18.
Health professionals suggest a steady pattern of losing a
pound (or equivalently 3,500 calories) per week to achieve a
more sustainable lose-weight plan (“Healthy Weight j
CDC.GOV,” 2017). Using this, we can also calculate how
the extra walking calories depicted in Figure 6 would contribute 
to a sustainable plan of losing weight. The contributions 
are outlined in Table 6. As can be seen, the extra
walking calorie burn can provide a student who is
14–18 years old on the 95th weight-for-age percentile, with
approximately 18% of the energy he/she needs to sustainably
lose weight to the obesity cut off. Similarly, the extra walking 
calorie burn provides the student with approximately
13% of the energy needed to lose weight from the obesity
cutoff to overweight.

8. Conclusions

In this study, we adopt latent-class MDCEV models to
investigate students’ overall tendencies toward combining

their most preferred choice bundle of mode-accompaniment
style with other options, in school commutes. In addition,
the models provide opportunity of directly predicting the
daily active-commute mileage of each student, which can
easily be transformed into public health indices such as daily
calorie burns. The model is sensitive to prevalence of violent-crime 
in different geographical locations, providing us
with the opportunity to predict health implications of testing
different safety-improvement policies. The models also
encompass household structure, auto ownership, urbanicity
(i.e., living in city of Chicago or somewhere else), built

environment (e.g., intersection density and youth population
density), and weather conditions among other explanatory
variables to prevent the omitted variable bias.
The results confirm a significant relationship between
students’ tendencies to choose active modes and violent
crime prevalence. Per the results, making city of Chicago as
safe as half of American cities would encourage students, for
up to 40%, to shift from non-active modes. The induced
demand of active-travel would provide obese students aged
14–18 with up to 18% of the calorie burn they need to
achieve a healthy pattern of weight loss to the obesity cutoff

and 13% of the calorie burn required for losing weight from
the obesity cutoff to overweight. The results also show that,
while adopting a safety-improvement strategy, different
neighborhoods should be prioritized based on the violent-crime 
rates and number of students there.
The current study also has certain limitations that need
to be addressed in future studies. First, we only studied the
effects of crime prevalence in the neighborhood where students 
reside. Future research can take a leap to also analyze
the behavior in terms of safety of the school’s environment
and, not least, safety of the routes chosen between home
and school. Also, an important stream of research for the
future would be to scrutinize the policy making aspects of
the subject, aiming at tailoring proper action plans for making 
Chicago safer, step by step. Future studies might also
assess how short- to mid-term remedies (e.g., providing
patrols to alleviate the safety concerns in certain times of
day for certain pathways) could encourage students and
their parents to go on active travels. Improving safety of a
neighborhood requires long-term plans to achieve sustainable states.
