Model for Children’s School Travel
Mode Choice

Accounting for Effects of Spatial and Social Interaction

Numerous programs aimed at enhancing the choice of bicycling and walking 
as modes of choice for children’s trips to and from school are being
implemented by public agencies around the world. Disaggregate models
that can account for the myriad of factors that influence the school mode
choice of children are needed to forecast the potential impacts of such programs 
and policies. This paper presents a model for school mode choice
that can capture the unobserved spatial interaction effects that may influence 
household decision making in choosing a mode of transportation
for children’s trips to and from school. For example, households that
are geographically close together in a neighborhood may interact or
observe one another and be influenced by each other’s actions. To overcome 
the computational intractability associated with estimating a discrete 
choice model with spatial interaction effects, the paper proposes a
maximum approximated composite marginal likelihood approach for
estimating model parameters. The model is applied to a sample of children 
in Southern California whose households responded to the 2009
National Household Travel Survey in the United States. Spatial correlation 
effects are statistically significant, and they arise from interactions
among households that are geographically close to one another. The findings 
suggest that public policy programs aimed at enhancing the use of
bicycle and walk modes may have a greater impact if directed toward the
local neighborhood level as opposed to a more diffuse regional level.

Much attention is being paid to the analysis of factors contributing to
the travel mode choice behavior of children for the trip to and from
school (1). Major programs aimed at promoting walking and bicycling 
to school are in place, particularly in the United States, where
a steady decline in the shares of walk and bicycle modes for school
trips has been observed over the past few decades (2–4). Examples of
these programs include the U.S. Department of Transportation Safe
Routes to School program (http://www.saferoutesinfo.org) and the
Walking School Bus initiative (http://www.walkingschoolbus.org).
Much of this interest stems from a desire to promote active transportation 

mode use among children with a view that the choice of such
modes would substantially help fight childhood obesity, which
has become a serious public health concern in the United States and
elsewhere (5). Several studies have shown that children who use active
modes of transportation for the trip to and from school are likely to be
more physically active during other periods of the day as well, thus
increasing their overall physical and mental well-being (6, 7).
Many factors affect the choice of mode for children’s trips to and
from school. Studies of children’s school mode choice show the
important effects of home–school proximity, household socioeconomic 
attributes, neighborhood built environment characteristics, 
and parental or caregiver perceptions of neighborhood safety
and vehicular traffic conditions on the path to and from school. A
systematic review of the literature on this topic is provided by Pont
et al. (8); some pertinent literature on this topic is reviewed in more
detail in the next section of this paper.
The literature review reveals that many studies loosely acknowledge, 
but largely ignore or do not adequately account for, the spatial
interaction effects that in<U+FB02>uence children’s mode choice to and from
school. Spatial interaction may occur in two ways: across spatial units
(zones, neighborhoods, tracts, blocks), because units that are closer to
one another share some common unobserved attributes, and across
behavioral units (individuals, households), because behavioral units
that are closer to one another in space may share common unobserved
attributes that affect the way they behave. In the context of children’s
school mode choice, a household’s decision related to a child’s school
trips may be in<U+FB02>uenced by the actions and choices of other households
and individuals in the same spatial cluster (e.g., a neighborhood). For
example, if many other children in the neighborhood walk to school,
parents may feel comfortable with their own child walking to school.
The Walking School Bus initiative was founded on this principle
of social interaction effects among households in close proximity
of one another.
Spatial interaction among individuals may arise in the context of
children’s mode choice to school in a number of ways. Similarly,
social interactions between parents in a neighborhood or whose children 
attend the same school could lead to an exchange of information
about characteristics of different modes, thus contributing to a dependence 
in the mode utility functions of different individuals. Another
possible way such a correlation can arise involves other children in
the same neighborhood using an active mode of transportation and
creating a positive environment for the use of such modes by improving 
the safety of walking and bicycling in the neighborhood; this
might persuade other children and their caregivers to adopt nonmotorized 
modes of transportation for the trip to and from school.
Finally, similarities in the built environment attributes across
households and individuals who are located in greater proximity of
one another may also create interactions in the modal utilities of
individuals.
Previous attempts to study school mode choice for children have
not accounted for such spatial and social interaction effects, although
some attempts have been made to consider spatial attributes in mode
choice decisions (9). Accounting for such effects requires methodologic 
advancements in the speci<U+FB01>cation and estimation of discrete
choice models; this paper presents a methodologic framework and
estimation approach that makes it possible to estimate mode choice
models with spatial and social interaction effects. Another major
impediment to the development of mode choice models that account
for spatial effects is that detailed spatial accessibility measures at
small levels of geography are generally not available in most travel
survey data sets. In this study, disaggregate census tract–level spatial
accessibility measures are computed based on Chen et al. (10) for a
survey sample drawn from the 2009 U.S. National Household Travel
Survey (NHTS) and used to disentangle unobserved spatial correlation 
effects from observable built environment attributes associated
with household location.
An overview of the literature is offered in the next section. The third
section presents the modeling methodology adopted in this paper. The
fourth section provides a description of the data set, and the <U+FB01>fth section 
summarizes model estimation results and study <U+FB01>ndings. The
<U+FB01>nal section offers concluding thoughts and directions for further
research.

ANALYSIS OF CHILDREN’S SCHOOL

MODE CHOICE

There has been considerable research aimed at studying children’s

school trip mode choice behavior. Pont et al. (8) provided a systematic 
review of the literature on this topic and more broadly on the topic
of active transportation among children. Studies on children’s school
mode choice span the globe, as it is clearly an issue of interest
in metropolitan contexts around the world. In the United States,
an analysis by McDonald (2) of the series of national travel surveys
from 1969 through 2001 shows the substantial decline in active mode
use over the past several decades. In 1969, about 41% of students
bicycled or walked to school; by 2001, that proportion had decreased
to about 13%. McDonald (2) indicated that the increased distance
between home and school may account for about one-half of the
decline in the use of active transportation modes to school.
Distance between home and school is a critical factor affecting the
use of nonmotorized modes (11). Ewing et al. (12) analyzed data from
Gainesville, Florida, and found distance to be one of the most important 
factors in the choice of bicycle and walking modes. Yeung et al.
(13) reported a similar result in an analysis of data from Brisbane,
Australia. However, unlike the U.S. study, they did not <U+FB01>nd a signi<U+FB01>cant 
difference in the body mass index of children using active modes
of transport versus those using motorized modes for travel to and from
school. Loucaides and Jago (7), analyzing data from Cyprus, found
that overweight children who walked to school were more physically
active in general than overweight children who were driven to school.
However, no such difference was observed in children of normal
weight. Cooper et al. (6) analyzed a sample from Bristol, United
Kingdom, and reported that boys who walk to school are likely to
be more physically active in general after school than those who
use motorized modes of transport. Such differences were not found
among girls.

Several studies are dedicated to analyzing the in<U+FB02>uence of the built
environment attributes and street configuration on school mode
choice. The results are somewhat mixed possibly because of the
difficulty in measuring built environment attributes and appending
such variables to individual person and household survey records.
For example, Yarlagadda and Srinivasan (14) found strong effects of
socioeconomic attributes and distance but reported that the impacts
of travel time and built environment attributes are statistically
insignificant. Similarly, McMillan (3) reported that urban form
variables had a modest impact on mode choice; these variables had
a relatively smaller impact than other variables representing socioeconomic 
attributes, distance, and vehicular traffic conditions. On the
other hand, Boarnet et al. (15), in analyzing the impact of the Safe
Routes to School program, found that sidewalk improvements, crossing 
improvements, and traffic control enhancements improved the
odds of children switching to walking and bicycling modes. Ewing
et al. (12) also noted that street density and sidewalk connectivity are
in<U+FB02>uential in facilitating walking to school.
Traffic safety and parental perceptions of crime against children
(e.g., abduction, molestation) were found to be signi<U+FB01>cant in a few
studies. Timperio et al. (16), in an analysis of data from Melbourne,
Australia, found that parental perceptions of the number of children
walking to school in the neighborhood, the presence of lights and adequate 
crossings, and the presence of a busy roadway between the
home and school affected mode choice. DiGuiseppi et al. (17), in a
study of data from the United Kingdom, found that adults accompanied 
84% of children to and from school. Only 3% of bicycle users
were allowed to bicycle on main roads. Ninety percent of parents were
very or quite worried about abduction or molestation and an almost
identical percentage were very or quite worried about traffic safety.
Parental concerns about safety were strong predictors of school mode
choice.
Some studies have identi<U+FB01>ed a few other factors in<U+FB02>uencing school
mode choice. Weather conditions were cited as an important explanatory 
variable by Müller et al. (18) in a study conducted in Germany,
while psychological and attitudinal factors were found to be signi<U+FB01>cant 
by Black et al. (4), who reported on a study conducted using data
gathered from 51 schools in the United Kingdom. Zwerts et al. (19),
in a study of Belgian students, found that students viewed the walking 
and bicycling experience en route to school as an important factor 
in the attractiveness of those modes. Dellinger and Staunton (20)
analyzed data from the U.S. National Health Survey (conducted by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). They reported that
barriers to walking and bicycling among children were long distances,
traffic danger, and adverse weather conditions. They found that 85%
of those who reported no barriers ended up using nonmotorized
modes of transportation.
The role of parental in<U+FB02>uence, intrahousehold interactions, and
social networks is further brought out in other studies. For example,
the study by Yarlagadda and Srinivasan (14) focused on the escort
person for the school trip. They reported that the presence of multiple 
school-going children in a household increases the odds that the
mother will drive the children to school. This <U+FB01>nding is in contrast
to that reported by McDonald (21), who noted that having siblings
increases the likelihood of walking and reduces the likelihood of
being driven. These <U+FB01>ndings point to the need to study further the
role of intrahousehold interactions in school mode choice behavior.
McMillan et al. (22) found that the odds of biking or walking to
school were 40% lower in girls than in boys but noted that the relationship 
was moderated by the caregiver’s walking propensity and
behavior. Pooley et al. (23) examined Global Positioning System

traces of school journeys of children in the United Kingdom and
found great variability in the characteristics of school travel. They
attributed this variability to complex household interactions, family
responsibilities, personal commitments, and personal preferences.
Zwerts et al. (19) noted that the social aspect associated with walking
or bicycling together was very important, particularly for girls.
From the review of the literature, it is clear that several factors in<U+FB02>uence 
school mode choice for children. While some results are mixed,
home-to-school distance (proximity), socioeconomic characteristics,
built environment attributes, street con<U+FB01>guration, land use density
and mix, and attitudes and perceptions of safety and crime are important 
determinants of school mode choice behavior. Although these
studies acknowledge the potential importance of interactions within
and outside the household arising from neighborhood effects, and
some studies attribute certain results to intrahousehold interactions
and neighborhood social networks, the studies do not explicitly
account for interaction and social network effects in the modeling
of school mode choice. Mitra et al. (9) analyzed data from Toronto,
Canada, and used spatial autocorrelation measures to identify zones
with high walking rates. However, their study did not involve estimating 
a mode choice model in the presence of spatial interaction effects.

Ulfarsson and Shankar (24) also attempted to capture correlation
effects, but their model speci<U+FB01>cation focused on accounting for correlations 
across alternatives using a covariance heterogeneity speci<U+FB01>cation 
(as opposed to capturing interaction effects across behavioral
units over space).
This paper aims to <U+FB01>ll a critical gap in the study of children’s school
mode choice behavior by developing a model that accounts for
spatial and social effects arising from interactions among household
members and across households in geographic and social clusters,
respectively.

MODELING METHODOLOGY

Spatial interaction effects may exist across discrete choice alternatives
(25, 26) or across decision makers (27, 28). This paper focuses on spatial 
and social interaction across decision makers. In the context of
spatial interaction across decision makers, earlier studies have focused
on binary response models or ordered response models. In particular, 
spatial interaction across individuals has seldom been discussed
in the context of unordered-response models. However, spatial
interaction in data may occur in unordered-response models for
the same reasons (e.g., diffusion effects, social spillover effects,
and unobserved location-related effects) that these effects have been
studied extensively in binary and ordered-response models.
In terms of estimating binary and ordered-response discrete
choice models with a general spatial structure, the analyst confronts,
in the familiar probit model, a multidimensional integral over a multivariate 
normal distribution, which is of the order of the number of
observational units in the data. While a number of approaches have
been proposed to tackle this enormous multidimensional integration 
problem (29, 30), none of these methods is practically feasible
for moderate-to-large samples as they are quite cumbersome from
a computational standpoint. In the context of unordered-response
models, the situation becomes even more difficult: the likelihood
function entails a multidimensional integral over a multivariate
normal distribution of the order of the number of observational units
factored up by the number of alternatives minus one. This situation,
however, is relatively easily handled by using the maximum approximated 
composite marginal likelihood (MACML) estimation method
proposed by Bhat (31).

Model Formulation

Consider a spatial lag model structure for unordered-response models 
as proposed by Bhat (31), where the dependencies in modal utilities 
across individuals is caused by a combination of direct spillover
effects (utilities of individuals rubbing off on each other) and indirect 
unobserved spatial–social effects. In such a model structure, the
utility (U ) that an individual q associates with alternative i (i = 1,
2, . . . , I) is assumed to take the following form:

where S is covariance matrix of y* and Bhat (31) provided the equations 
for calculating it. F(I-1)*Q is the multivariate cumulative normal

distribution of (I - 1) * Q dimensions. Of course, maximizing the
above likelihood function requires the evaluation of an (I - 1) * Q
integral. Integrals of this high dimensionality are clearly impractical
to evaluate with the usual Monte Carlo simulation methods. However, 
the MACML estimation approach recently proposed by Bhat
(31) can be used here. The MACML method is brie<U+FB02>y described in
the next section.

Maximum Approximated Composite
Likelihood Approach

In contrast to approaches based on evaluating the multidimensional
integrals in the true likelihood function using simulation techniques,
the MACML estimation approach for cross-sectional unorderedresponse 
models with normally distributed mixing is based on analytic
approximations to the multivariate normal cumulative distribution
functions in the true likelihood function. The approximation adopted
by Bhat (31) relies only on bivariate and univariate standard normal
cumulative distribution function computations and is computationally 
efficient. The approximation is combined with the composite
marginal likelihood (CML) estimation approach for estimation of
unordered-response models with normally distributed mixing. The
MACML approach can be applied with simple optimization software 
for likelihood estimation. It also represents a conceptually
simpler alternative to simulation techniques and has the advantage 
of reproducibility of the results. The covariance matrix of the
MACML estimator may be easily computed by using the inverse
of Godambe’s (32) sandwich information matrix [see Bhat (31) for
complete details].
In the MACML estimation approach, a combination of the CML
method and the approximation method for multivariate normal orthant
probabilities is used. The pairwise CML function for the sample is
given by the following expression:

where individual q’s choice is denoted by Cq and mq is the observed
choice of individual q.
Each multivariate orthant probability above has a dimension
equal to (I - 1) × 2, which can be computed by using the approximation 
proposed by Bhat (31) in the MACML approach. The
variances and correlations in the bivariate and univariate cumulative 
normal distribution expressions in the approximation can be
obtained as appropriate submatrices of S. An issue that has a direct
impact on computational time in the CML approach is the number
of pairs [Q(Q - 1)/2 pairs] of (I - 1) × 2 multivariate probability
computations.
The framework discussed above is extendable to include social
and other forms of dependence as well. This is because the weight
matrix W that forms the basis for spatial dependence can also be the
basis for more general forms of dependence. In fact, W can be parameterized 
as a <U+FB01>nite mixture of several weight matrices [as in Yang
and Allenby’s (33) application to the simple binary choice model],
with each weight matrix being related to a speci<U+FB01>c covariate k—that

is, W = <U+2211>Kk=1 <U+03D5>kWk, where <U+03D5>k is the weight on the kth covariate in
determining dependency between individuals (<U+2211>Kk=1 <U+03D5>k = 1), and Wk
is a measure of distance between individuals on the kth covariate.

DATA

The data used in this study were derived from the California add-on
sample of the 2009 NHTS conducted from 2008 through 2009 in the
United States. Within the California add-on sample, the survey subsample 
of respondents from the Los Angeles–Riverside–Orange
County region was extracted and used for the model estimation
effort. This selection process was done for several reasons. First, the
use of a national sample for studying school mode choice behavior
may be inappropriate given that there are likely to be substantive geographic 
differences across the country. Spatial correlation effects are
likely to be more localized in nature, calling for the use of data drawn
from a more limited geographic region for analysis and model development. 
Second, the use of a very large sample for model estimation
would produce in<U+FB02>ated test statistics, which would affect inferences
drawn from the model results. Finally, the authors have access to census 
tract–level accessibility measures and land use data for the Los
Angeles region in conjunction with an ongoing activity-based model
development effort under way for the Southern California Association
of Governments.
The survey collects detailed socioeconomic, demographic, and
travel information for all household members in respondent households. 
The survey also collects information about usual travel characteristics 
by asking questions about travel undertaken in the past week.
Extensive descriptive statistical analysis was conducted on the data to
understand mode choice patterns for children’s school trips and to
identify explanatory factors that may in<U+FB02>uence such behavior. For the
sake of brevity, all the analyses conducted are not described and presented 
here, but some highlights are noted to provide an overview of
the data assembly process.


The survey sample included 1,192 children of 5 to 15 years of age
for whom school mode choice behavior could be analyzed. Table 1
presents the average travel time to school, the average travel time by
mode used, the median household income, the median household
income by mode used, and descriptive statistics of other household
characteristics to which these children belong. In general, the travel
time to school ranges from 10 to 15 min, with an average of 12.4 minutes. 
Only the average bus travel time falls outside this range, with an
average value of just over 25 min. Those who walk and use the school
bus report lower median household incomes than other groups. Thus,
it is clear that mode choice to and from school is correlated to income;
perhaps lower car ownership in these households leads children to
walk and ride the school bus. In general, the household characteristics
show that households are larger than would be expected if one were
analyzing the general population. This is consistent with the fact that
the analysis sample here focuses on households with children going
to school.
The importance of distance in school mode choice behavior has
been highlighted in previous research. Table 2 presents modal split
distributions by home-to-school distance bands. The association
between home-to-school distance and modal split is readily apparent. 
While the overall mode split for car is 44%, the highest among
all modes, it is clear that walking is the predominant choice of mode
at very short distances. For distances less than 1/4 mi, 60% of children 
walk to school and fewer than 25% ride to school in a car. However, 
13% of children use a combination of car and walk (i.e., they

take the car to school but walk home after school). There is a dramatic 
increase in car mode share as distance increases; the car mode
share nearly doubles to 46% at distances more than 1/4 mi but less than
1/2 mi. The car mode share continues to increase with distance and
reaches nearly 75% at home-to-school distances in excess of 2 mi.
The school bus mode share also increases with distance, consistent
with expectations. The bicycle mode share shows some <U+FB02>uctuations,
with higher shares observed for very short trips less than 1/4 mi and
midrange distances of 1/2 to 2 mi. The car–school bus combination
shows a signi<U+FB01>cant modal percent (6%) at longer distances, again
consistent with expectations. Walk mode share dramatically drops
off with increasing distances, with just about a 1% mode share for
school trip distances greater than 2 mi. One factor affecting the choice
of active modes of transportation is that nearly 40% of the children 
live more than 2 mi from their school. Only about 25% of the
children live within 1/2 mi of their school location. As schools grow
increasingly larger and cover larger boundary areas, this challenge
may become more pronounced.

An analysis of the data showed that some children use a combination 
of modes to commute to and from school. In a crossclassification 
table of modes to and from school (not presented

here due to space considerations), the diagonal elements of the
table show the largest figures, as expected, signifying that a vast
majority use the same mode to and from school. Of the 1,192 children, 
1,041 (87%) use the same mode to and from school. More
than 50% of the children use a car in both directions, and close to

20% walk in both directions. Of the modal transition segments,
the largest one (with 71 students) involves using a car to go to
school and walking home from school. Other modal transitions are
rather small, although the walk–car and car–school bus segments
cannot be ignored.
In preparing the <U+FB01>nal data set for model estimation, modes with

very few observations were eliminated. They included “other,”
“school bus + walk,” and “bicycle + car,” which left 1,143 students
in the sample. After further cleaning the data set, removing observations 
with missing information and clearly miscoded values and other

reductions, 800 observations were retained for estimation.
In the survey, the walk travel time was reported for those children
who walked to school. In addition, the distance between home and
school was obtained for all the children in <U+FB01>ve distance bands (see
Table 2). In examining the walk travel times and the distances to school
for children who walked, a good bit of variation was found in walk
times within the sample of children who were in the same distance
band. So, it was decided, from an econometric efficiency perspective,
to consider both travel time and travel distance in the speci<U+FB01>cation. In
doing so, the walk time to school was imputed for those children who
did not walk to school by computing the mean walk travel time for children 
who did walk to school in the corresponding distance band.

However, as reported later, walk travel distance did not turn out to be
signi<U+FB01>cant after controlling for walk travel time. For other modes,
imputation procedures were similarly developed to construct travel
time values for all individuals (whether or not they used the
mode) and both travel times and distances (in the <U+FB01>ve distance bands)
were considered. For all the nonwalk modes, the distance variable
speci<U+FB01>cation turned out to be better, presumably because of rounding
and inaccuracy in trip time reporting for these relatively long trips.
As mentioned earlier, there may be household interactions that
affect choice of mode for school trips. The bicycling and walking
activity of adults in each household is reported in the survey as the
number of bicycling and walking trips undertaken for various purposes 
in the previous week. For this study, adults (parents) were classi<U+FB01>ed 
as active bicyclists or walkers if they made at least <U+FB01>ve trips
using the corresponding mode in the previous week, with at least one
Distance from Home to School

trip being made for a purpose other than to escort children to and
from home. In other words, if the sole reason an adult made bicycling
or walking trips in the past week is to escort children, then the person 
is not considered an active bicyclist or walker (to avoid potential
endogeneity problems).
The NHTS data set includes a set of attitudinal variables that capture 
individual attitudes and perceptions. In particular, the survey asks
parents to rate a series of issues on a 5-point scale with a value of 1
meaning that the consideration is not an issue and 5 meaning that the
consideration is a serious issue. Adults were asked to identify the
extent to which each of the following considerations affected the decision 
to allow their child (or children) to walk or bicycle between home
and school: distance between home and school, amount of traffic
along the route, speed of traffic along the route, violence and crime
along the route, and poor weather or climate in the area. A principal
component factor analysis (without rotation) was undertaken to
reduce these <U+FB01>ve attitudinal variables into a set of orthogonal factors. 
The factor analysis yielded two factors, one corresponding to
objectively measurable attributes such as distance and speed and
volume of traffic, and the other corresponding to more subjective
measures of crime and weather. These factors were used in the model
specification to capture the effects of parental attitudes on school
mode choice.

MODEL ESTIMATION RESULTS

A simple probit model that does not account for spatial–social interaction 
effects and the spatial interaction model were estimated, and
the results are presented in Table 3. A systematic procedure in which
variables were entered in a stepwise manner and checked for their

statistical signi<U+FB01>cance and intuitive behavioral interpretation was followed 
to arrive at the <U+FB01>nal model speci<U+FB01>cation. Various forms of
explanatory variables and interaction effects among them were tested
to arrive at the best possible model speci<U+FB01>cation that is parsimonious
and yet sensitive to a range of effects that one would expect to see in
a mode choice model of the type developed here.
An examination of the alternative speci<U+FB01>c constants shows that, in
general, the bicycle and car + walk combination modes are less preferred 
than other modes (although the constants also control for the
range of exogenous variable values in the sample). It is also found
that there are substantial differences in the alternative speci<U+FB01>c constants 
between the probit model with no spatial–social effects and the
spatial interaction model. This is a <U+FB01>rst indication that ignoring spatial 
interaction effects when they are present results in inaccurate estimates 
of preferences for alternative modes. With respect to travel
characteristics, <U+FB01>ndings are largely consistent with expectations. As
the time to walk increases, the utility of walking decreases. For distances 
less than 2 mi, the utility of the school bus decreases; presumably, 
the bus is of greater value when distances to school are more
than 2 mi. On the other hand, the utility of bicycle and car + walk
combination modes is higher for distances within this range.
Age and gender of the student are statistically signi<U+FB01>cantly associated
with school mode choice. The utility of bicycling, walking,
and using a combination of car and walking increases with the age
of the child. In other words, older children are more likely to use nonmotorized 
modes of transportation than younger children, presumably
because parents feel more comfortable letting older children use these
modes. The coefficient associated with age is substantially higher
for the bicycle mode than for the walk modes, suggesting that the
utility for bicycle increases more than for walk modes with increasing 
age. A gender effect is apparent, with females less likely to choose

a bicycle than their male counterparts, a <U+FB01>nding previously reported
by McMillan et al. (22).
With respect to household demographics, higher household income
and vehicle ownership is associated with a greater propensity to use a
car and a lower utility for school bus and walking. This is consistent
with previous research, which also reports that households with higher
levels of vehicle ownership are less likely to depend on alternative
modes for transporting children to and from school (12, 21). The presence 
of adult nonworkers in the household positively affects use of the
walk mode, perhaps because the adult nonworker can accompany the
child on the walk to and from school (alleviating safety concerns associated 
with having the child walk alone). However, when there are one
or more adult nonworkers in the household with a spare automobile,
then the utility of a car increases. The parental attitude is captured
through the attitudinal factor that measures whether the parents considered 
distance and traffic conditions to be issues associated with
having their child(ren) commute by walk or bicycle. If the attitudinal
factor value increases, then it means the parents considered the issue
to be more serious. As expected, in households where parents had
issues with distance and traffic conditions, the utility of walking to and
from school decreases. The subjective attitudinal factor (capturing
weather and safety concerns) was not statistically significant. A
physically active parent—an active bicyclist or an active walker—
increases the probability of a child using the corresponding mode.
However the relationship appears to be weak and the coefficients were
insigni<U+FB01>cant at the 0.05 level of signi<U+FB01>cance. So these parameters
are not included in the <U+FB01>nal results presented in this paper.
Spatial factors play an important role in determining school mode
choice. The accessibility of the neighborhood is measured by the total
amount of retail employment that can be reached within a 10-min
radius of the home location. These accessibility measures were computed 
at the tract level using block-level data about employment in
different industry sectors obtained from the Southern California
Association of Governments. In general, it is found that a higher level
of neighborhood accessibility (measured in terms of retail employment) 
has a negative association with the school bus mode utility. It
is possible that these households are in higher-density areas more
conducive to walking and bicycling, or there are busy streets that
motivate use of the car. This <U+FB01>nding is consistent with that reported
by Ulfarsson and Shankar (24), Yarlagadda and Srinivasan (14), and
Ewing et al. (12).
Spatial interaction effects were tested by specifying the weight
matrix using both geographic proximity and demographic closeness
as potential measures of the correlation. For geographic proximity,
alternative speci<U+FB01>cations of distance (e.g., inverse of distance between
individuals, inverse of exponentiated distance) and membership in a
county (wij = 1 if i and j belong to the same county; wij = 0 otherwise)
were used. The distance between individuals was obtained as the distance 
separation between the centroids of the tracts of the household
locations of individuals. For demographic closeness, alternative
specifications of income and age similarity were created by using
demographic distance measures. For each of these specifications,
parameters were estimated independently with the MACML approach
described here. The social interaction effects turned out to be statistically 
insigni<U+FB01>cant in all demographic distance-based weight matrix
speci<U+FB01>cations. The spatial interaction parameter was signi<U+FB01>cant (and
positive) for all geographic distance-based weight matrix speci<U+FB01>cations, 
and the best CML was obtained for the speci<U+FB01>cation using the
inverse of distance as the spatial proximity measure.
The spatial correlation parameter <U+03C1> is positive, high in magnitude 
(0.844), and statistically signi<U+FB01>cant; the attributes indicate a high

degree of geographic interdependence in the choice of mode of travel
to school. The spatial lag model seems more appropriate than the
nonspatial independent multinomial probit (IMNP) model. Another
way to demonstrate this is to use the adjusted composite maximum
likelihood ratio test statistic, which follows a chi-squared distribution 
(31, 34). This statistic returned a value of 17.2 for comparing the
spatial lag model with the IMNP model, which is higher than the corresponding 
chi-squared table value with 1 degree of freedom at any
reasonable level of signi<U+FB01>cance. However, and very importantly, the
difference between the IMNP model and the spatial lag model is not
simply a matter of data <U+FB01>t. The effects of a change in variable on
aggregate mode shares will be quite different between the two models, 
because the IMNP model ignores interdependence, while the
spatial lag model accommodates spillover effects due to interactions
between decision agents and so may lead to relatively large changes
in aggregate mode behavior despite small changes in the underlying
primitives (or determinants) of the behavior. To demonstrate this difference 
in effects between the IMNP and the spatial lag model, this
study examined the effect of a 5% decrease in walk time to school
(e.g., due to better siting of schools relative to residences) and the
impact of a 25% decrease in the level of negativity in parental atti-
tude (in the context of distance and traffic conditions being deterrents) 
toward allowing children to travel to school by walking or
bicycling. The decrease in walk time is estimated to lead to a 0.29%
decrease in car mode share according to the IMNP model but to a
decrease in car mode share by almost 12% according to the spatial
lag model. Similarly, the improvement in parental attitude toward
nonmotorized modes is estimated to decrease the car mode share by
just 0.48% according to the probit model but by 3.2% as per the spatial 
lag model. Clearly, spillover effects are at work here, and the
IMNP model provides estimates that are quite different than those
from the spatial lag model.
In summary, the spatial interdependence means that, for any
individual, the utility of each alternative is positively (negatively)
in<U+FB02>uenced by an increase (decrease) in the utility of corresponding
alternatives for his or her geographic neighbors. In other words, the
spatial dependence in school mode choice appears to arise more from
social interaction and neighborhood location effects associated with
households geographically clustered closer together. It is possible that
parents of households living in a zone, tract, or neighborhood interact
with one another and share experiences about the school travel of their
children. Households may band together to facilitate walking and
bicycling in a safe and secure way, but this interaction among households 
is more due to geographic proximity considerations as opposed
to socioeconomic similarity considerations (although it is plausible
that households living within a neighborhood are at least somewhat
homogeneous with respect to socioeconomic characteristics). When
other children in the neighborhood use a mode such as bicycling or
walking, this creates a positive externality by improving the safety of
bicycling and walking in the neighborhood, thus enhancing the utility 
of these modes for households in the neighborhood. As households
in a geographic cluster are likely to deal with the same or similar built
environment, it is not surprising that the geographic distance-based
spatial interaction parameter turned out to be statistically signi<U+FB01>cant.

CONCLUSIONS

This research focused on modeling school trip mode choice behavior
among children (less than 15 years of age) with a view to examine the
presence of spatial and social interaction effects that may affect such

behavior. These effects may arise due to interactions among households 
that are geographically or demographically similar to one
another. When such interaction effects are present, the modal utilities
of individuals become dependent, thus violating the basic assumption
of traditional discrete choice models that assume independence of error
terms across observations. The usual maximum likelihood estimate of
a model that accounts for global spatial–social effects is quite complex
as one must evaluate very high dimensional integrals of a multivariate
normal distribution to compute the likelihood function (the order of the
integral is the number of observations multiplied by the number of
alternatives minus one; in the empirical context of the current study,
this translates to 4,000 dimensional integrals). In this paper, a MACML
approach recently developed by Bhat (31) was used to estimate a
school mode choice model that accounts for spatial interaction effects.
In this study, the MACML approach was applied to a sample of
children in the Southern California (Los Angeles and surrounding
cities) region of the United States with data collected as part of the
2009 NHTS. The survey sample includes 800 children who provided
detailed mode choice information for the journey to and from school
along with information about household member use of bicycle and
walk modes and parental concerns about the built environment in
relation to their children’s use of bicycling and walking to and from
school. Both an independent probit model (that does not account for
spatial interaction effects) and a spatial correlation model were estimated 
to determine whether the spatial interaction effects are signi<U+FB01>cant 
and present. It was found that the spatial correlation, arising from
interactions among households that are geographically clustered, is
statistically signi<U+FB01>cant.
The <U+FB01>ndings in this paper suggest that the consideration of spatial
interaction effects is important in modeling mode choice behavior, particularly 
in the context of children’s school mode choice, where residential 
proximity-based interaction among households and children is
likely to be prevalent. This means that programs aimed at enhancing
bicycle and walk as modes of choice for the trip to and from school
(such as the Safe Routes to School program in the United States)
should be focused to maximize the likelihood of interactions based on
geographic proximity. That is, given that spatial interaction effects fade
over distance (according to the inverse distance speci<U+FB01>cation for
spatial weights), one can use an optimization program to de<U+FB01>ne the
boundaries of <U+FB01>xed neighborhoods to maximize interaction effects.
This paper accommodates spatial dependence due to proximity in
residential locations of children and social interaction effects. An
avenue for future research would be to extend the dependence effects
to include proximity in school locations of children, with the notion
that peer effects at school may also affect children’s school mode
choice. This additional effect can be accommodated in a straightforward 
manner in the authors’ methodology by de<U+FB01>ning another weight
matrix Wk that corresponds to school location proximity and considering 
this weight matrix as one additional <U+FB01>nite mixture dimension
affecting the overall weight matrix W (W = <U+2211> kK=1 <U+03D5>kWk). However, this
would require identifying the school that each child in the sample
attends, with a geocoding of these school locations. This information
is not available in the NHTS data used in the current analysis but may
be available in other activity-travel data sets in which each activity
episode location is geocoded.