Using parental active travel behavior and beliefs to predict active travel to
school among children
                                     
Active travel (AT) is associated with improved health in adults and children, and children’s AT to                       
school has steadily declined in recent years. Understanding influences on AT will inform intervention 
development to increase AT among youth. Therein, this study aimed to examine the                          
relationship between AT of children to school and parental AT behavior and beliefs. This was a
cross-sectional study of employed adults conducted via an online survey. Participants reported the             
number of times per week their children, themselves and their spouses actively traveled. Beliefs                  
for AT were also measured. Logistic regressions predicted child AT to school based on parental AT         
behavior and beliefs. Parents (n ¼ 344) were primarily white (85.8%), female (66.3%), overweight or
obese (48.0%) and married (82.6%), with high levels of income and education and reported that
12.2% (n ¼ 41) of their children were active travelers. Children had higher odds of AT to school if
the parent actively traveled (Odds ratio [OR] ¼ 1.23 [1.12–1.34], p<.001) or the spouse was an
active traveler (OR ¼ 1.28 [1.14–1.45], p<.001). Speaking with children about reasons for AT (OR ¼
1.61 [1.19–2.18], p¼.002), children being eager to actively travel to school (OR ¼ 4.20 [2.82–6.25],
p<.001), and parental AT as a child (OR ¼ 1.29 [1.03–1.60], p¼.02) were associated with more AT,
and odds of children actively traveling to school were lower with higher parent body mass index
(OR ¼ 0.87 [0.79–0.96], p¼.005) and more cars in the household (OR ¼ 0.47 [0.30–0.72], p¼.001).
These findings suggest that children’s AT to school is directly influenced by the travel behavior,
attitudes, and beliefs of parents.

Introduction                                                                  
										
The association between physical activity (PA) and health benefits 
has been well-documented in both adults and children
										
(United States Department of Health and Human Services,                       
2008). Meeting these guidelines for physical activity has been                
associated with obesity prevention (Flynn et al., 2006), cardiovascular 
disease risk reduction (Andersen et al., 2006), good                 
mental health (Biddle, Gorely, & Stensel, 2004), and better academic 
performance (Taras, 2005). Despite the known benefits                   
of PA, rates remain low among children (United States                         
Department of Health and Human Services, 2008). Active                        
travel (AT; i.e., walking and biking) has been shown to be a                  
useful technique to meet PA recommendations and improve                       
health in adults and children (Davison, Werder, & Lawson,                     
2008; Gordon-Larsen et al., 2009). Additionally, communities                  
with greater AT also have improved air quality, less pollution                
and traffic and experience economic benefits associated with                  
greater walking and biking (Rails to Trails Conservancy,                      
2008). Nevertheless, according to national data, rates of AT to               
school have been consistently declining over the last half century 
(Davison et al., 2008). Currently less than one-third of                 
children living within one mile of school walked (Centers for                 
Disease Control and Prevention, 2002) and national data indicates 
that in 2009 12.7% of students in kindergarten through                  

8th grade walked or biked to school, compared with more
than 40% in 1969 (McDonald, Brown, Marchetti, &
Pedroso, 2011).
A social ecological framework is useful in understanding
the influences on AT, considering factors at the individual,
social, environmental, community and policy levels (Sallis
et al., 2006; Sallis et al., 2015). Greater research has examined 
demographics trends (e.g., age, gender, and race) in AT
and the environment or policy compared with social factors.
Previous research on social influences indicated that parental
commuting habits, attitudes and schedule remain among the
most influential on AT to school for children (Carver et al.,
2005; Davison et al., 2008; Lu et al., 2014; Te Velde et al.,
2017). Other social factors include having others to actively
travel with, likely related to safety concerns from crime
(Carver et al., 2005; Timperio et al., 2006; Zhu, Arch, & Lee,
2008; Zhu & Lee, 2009). From an environmental perspective,
the availability of programing to support AT to school, like
Safe Routes to School campaigns, which focus on both
engineering (i.e., infrastructure) and encouragement for AT
are positive influences (Lee, Yoon, & Zhu, 2016). Other notable 
environment influences include: weather, the presence
of a steep hill, concerns about safety from traffic, the availability 
of supportive infrastructure to support AT and distance 
to school (Carlson et al., 2014; Chillon et al., 2014;

Davison et al., 2008; Lu et al., 2014; Timperio et al., 2006;
Zhu et al., 2008; Zhu & Lee, 2009).
Due to the marked declines in AT among children,
understanding the influences on AT will inform intervention
development to increase AT among youth. Further, as
parents have a major influence on their children’s health
and health behaviors, it is important to examine how parental 
AT and related correlates predict AT among their children. 
Accordingly, this study aimed to examine the
relationship between AT of children to school and parental
AT behavior and beliefs.

Methods

This was a cross-sectional study of employed adults conducted 
via an online survey distributed using Qualtrics software 
(Provo, UT). Data were collected from June to
December 2011. Detailed methods are published elsewhere
(Bopp, Kaczynski, & Campbell, 2013).
Participants and recruitment
Recruitment took place primarily in the mid-Atlantic United
States (PA, OH, WV, MD, NJ, and DE). This was a convenience 
sample of employees who worked for large employers
in the regions (e.g., school districts and local/regional government) 
who were willing to help in recruiting participants.

Individuals over the age of 18, who were employed outside
the home, and were physically able to walk or bike, were eligible 
for participation in the study. Individuals who reported
having one or more school-aged children living at home
with them were included in the present study.

Measures

Parent travel modes

Participants reported the number of times per week walked,
biked, driven, or took public transit to and from work for
themselves and their spouses. The number of total trips was
summed and parents were categorized as an active traveler
if they reported one or more trip/week via walking or biking. 
One or more trip a week was used to classify active
travel status due to the distribution of responses among
those who reported any AT trips; the none/any dichotomization 
was most reflective of responses.

Demographics and health

Participants reported on their sex, marital status, education
level, age, number of cars in the household, height and
weight (body mass index [BMI] was calculated), number of
chronic health conditions, and their perceived health status
(1 ¼ poor to 5 ¼ excellent).

Psychosocial influences

Spouse normative beliefs for AT were measured using a 5-
point Likert scale (1 ¼ strongly disagree and 5 ¼ strongly
agree) to respond to four statements about AT: “My spouse/
partner and I discuss issues related to walking and biking to
work,” “I value what my spouse/partner thinks about the
way I travel to work,” “I have an opinion on the way my
spouse/partner travels to and from work,” and “My spouse/
partner influences my choice on how I travel to and from
work” (Conn, Tripp-Reimer, & Maas, 2003). Participants
were also asked to report their self-efficacy (confidence) for
bicycling with a 5-point scale (1 ¼ not at all confident to
5 ¼ very confident).
Community and environmental influences: Using a 5-point 
Likert scale participants indicated how pedestrian and
bicycle friendly (1 ¼ not at all to 5 ¼ very much) there community 
was. Participants indicated (yes/no) the number of
supports for cycling in their community (e.g., bike racks on
public transit, share the road signs), which was summed.
Walk and bike time to work was reported and dichotomized
as </>20 min.
Child travel modes: Participants also reported separately
per child (if applicable) the number of times in a typical week
their children walked, bike, were driven, or took public transit
to and from school, their child’s age and distance to their
school (categorized as 0–0.5 miles, 0.5–1 mile, 1–1.5, and >1.5
miles). Children were categorized as being an active traveler if
they walked or bike to/from school one or more day week,
with the same rationale as described above with parents AT
participation. Finally, participants responded to a series of 12
questions on a five-point scale (1 ¼ strongly disagree and
5 ¼ strongly agree) regarding individual normative beliefs on
AT as it relates to their children (Table 1). Parents were categorized 
as having no children that actively travel or having
one or more child that actively travel.

Statistical analyses

Descriptive statistics and frequencies described the sample.
Separate logistic regressions were used to predict if a parent
had a child that engaged in AT to school for the parental AT
behavior and beliefs. All analyses were performed using SPSS
23.0 (Armonk, NY). Given the number of analyses conducted,
we used a Bonferroni correction and set significance levels
were set at p < .01.

Results

The demographics of the sample are shown in Table 1. A
total of 1,234 individuals completed the survey, though only
individuals who reported having school aged children
(n ¼ 344, 27.9% of the original sample) were included in the
analyses outlined above.
All results are listed in Table 2. Parents had had higher
odds of having a child who actively traveled to school if the
parent was an active traveler (odds ratio [OR] ¼ 1.23
[1.12–1.34], p < .001) or the parent had a spouse who was

an active traveler (OR ¼ 1.28 [1.14–1.45], p < .001). Higher
odds of having actively traveling children was also associated
with greater parental perceived behavioral control (OR ¼
1.07 [1.03–1.11], p ¼ .001), greater parental perceived community 
pedestrian friendliness (OR ¼ 1.49 [1.11–2.11],
p ¼ .007) and bicycle friendliness (OR ¼ 1.34 [1.00–1.78],
p ¼ .047), and more community supports for AT (OR ¼
2.06 [1.39–3.04], p < .001). Speaking with children about
reasons for AT (OR ¼ 1.61 [1.19–2.18], p ¼ .002), children
being eager to actively travel to school (OR ¼ 4.20
[2.82–6.25], p < .001), neighborhood safety from crime (OR
¼ 1.80 [1.18–2.74], p ¼ .006), neighborhood safety from traffic 
(OR ¼ 1.57 [1.17–2.11], p ¼ .003), closer reported distance 
to school (OR ¼ 0.26 [0.10–0.69]), sharing with
children why the parent travels to work in the mode that
they do (OR ¼ 1.57 [1.17–2.11], p ¼ .003), parental beliefs
that they are a good role model to their children (OR ¼
1.65 [1.13–2.42], p ¼ .01), and most children in the neighborhood 
actively traveling (OR ¼ 3.07 [2.24–4.20], p < .001)
were associated with higher odds of having a child who
actively travels.
Alternatively, odds of having a child actively traveling to
school were lower with higher parent BMI (OR ¼ 0.87
[0.79–0.96], p ¼ .005), more cars in the household (OR ¼
0.47 [0.30–0.72], p¼.001), and more children in the neighborhood 
driving or taking the bus to school (OR ¼ 0.45
[0.33–0.58], p < .001). Variables not significantly related to

having an actively traveling child included: parental AT
beliefs, parental participation in AT as a child, parental perceived 
health status, number of chronic diseases in the
parents, parental self-efficacy for biking skills, perceived
community supports for AT, parental/spousal schedule
impacting their child’s travel, believing their child gets
enough PA, and believing their child is too sedentary.

Discussion

This study revealed a number of interesting relationships
between parental AT behavior and beliefs and child AT
behavior. There is strong evidence that participating in AT
results in positive health outcomes for children, underscoring 
the importance of focusing on AT (Davison et al., 2008;
Lubans, Boreham, Kelly, & Foster, 2011).On the whole,
greater child AT behavior was predicted by greater parental
AT behavior and stronger positive parental AT beliefs. It is
important to understand the influence of parents on their
children’s AT behavior.
Multiple studies have assessed the relationship between
parental PA and child PA, in general finding that more
active children have more active parents (Moore et al., 1991;
Yang, Telama, & Laakso, 1996), and children with active
parents were two to three times as likely to be active as
compared to children with inactive parents. However, limited 
research has examined the relationship between parent

AT: active travel; BMI: body mass index.
AT and child travel mode. Previous work has examined different 
parental factors related to children’s AT; Cooper,
Page, Foster, and Qahwaji (2003) note that children’s travel
behavior decisions are likely made by the parents. Other
studies have found parental restrictions on children’s movement 
can influence AT (Henne, Tandon, Frank, & Saelens,
2014). Still, these results point to the importance of further
examining this relationship.
The current study also noted the importance of parental
beliefs for AT to school. In alignment with our results, previous 
research has found that greater environmental supports 
and parental support for PA correlate with higher
levels of PA among children (Sallis, Prochaska, & Taylor,
2000) and there is a negative correlation between parental
anxiety about environmental safety and children’s PA levels
(Weir, Etelson, & Brand, 2006). These findings highlight the
importance of both the social and physical environment of
the neighborhood as it relates to children’s safety while
being active underscores the importance of perceived versus
actual environment with this population. Communities aiming 
to address both child and adult active travel should follow 
frameworks that address a wide range of needs and
abilities, including Complete Streets Initiatives which help to
address planning an infrastructure that help contribute to
perceived safety and decreased pedestrian and cyclist accidents 
and fatalities (Smart Growth American and National
Complete Streets Coalition, 2016). Safe Routes to School
programs also have the potential to address some of these

barriers, encompassing both the environment through
engineering strategies as well as encouraging behavior
change through education and encouragement (National
Center for Safe Routes to School, 2018). The Safe Routes to
School National Partnership also provides insightful report
cards to states which can provide a foundation for planning
around encouraging AT for children with potential impact
on adults’ AT as well (Lieberman, Pasillas, Pedroso,
Williams, & Zimmerman, 2018). These findings suggest that
efforts to promote AT have implications across multiple age
groups and should consider policy and environmental
change along with programmatic efforts to address beliefs
and social norms.
Our results showed that children have lower odds of
actively traveling if their parents have a high BMI, if there
are more cars in the household, or if more children in the
neighborhood are driven or ride the bus to school. A strong
relationship exists between parental and child obesity, with
more obese children tending to have more obese parents
who tend to be less physically active (Fogelholm, Nuutinen,
Pasanen, My€  oh€anen, & S€a€atel€a, 1999). Accordingly, the relationship 
between lack of AT among children and higher
parental BMI is unsurprising. Number of cars in the household, 
self-efficacy, and social support for AT have been
noted to be determinants of AT among children in previous
studies, in line with current findings (Black et al., 2001;
Kim, Lee, Lu, & Mendoza, 2017; Panter, Jones, Van Sluijs, &
Griffin, 2010; Panter et al., 2008). The overlap with parental

support and children’s AT was also noted by Mah
et al.(2017), along with the importance of a perceived supportive 
physical environment. School health professionals
and public health practitioners could apply this information
to develop family-oriented interventions and programs to
build confidence and skills for AT and create social norms
within the family for AT participation. Further studies
should examine a broad range of influences to comprehensively 
examine what factors could impact children’s AT in
order to develop effective programs to target this behavior.
Despite the significant findings, this study is not without
limitations including the cross-sectional design, volunteer
sample, self-report measures, homogenous sample, and low
rates of AT among participants. Given the low rates of AT
for children we were unable to separate out child specific
trends (e.g., age), limiting our ability to fully understand thi
relationship. Additionally we were unable to document other
social influences (e.g., neighborhood cohesion; Salahuddin
et al. 2016) which have been noted to be related to children’s 
AT. Also, we did not adjust the analyses for other factors 
which could have allowed for determining the most
influential variables. Lastly, the sample was not very ethnically 
or economically diverse, limiting our ability to generalize 
our results. This is problematic in that income/education
and race/ethnicity are known to be a significant influence
on AT participation for both children and adults. Further
studies should see to recruit a more diverse sample.
Limitations notwithstanding, results from this study may
be useful in better targeting AT. Not only is this information
useful in promoting existing AT programs for communities
such Safe Routes to School and Complete Streets, this information 
may also prove beneficial in providing preliminary
data for developing AT programs and interventions for
parents to increase rates of AT among their children.
Improvements in education, policy, and environmental
changes supporting AT among both adults and children are
also necessary to ensure improvements in AT behaviors and
beliefs. Initiatives focused on promoting AT among children
have been used around the world; a review of interventions
promoting AT to school noted many environmental and
policy level strategies, though few studies have also included
parent AT habits as a part of their strategies, suggesting a
significant gap in the literature (Pang et al., 2017).
These findings suggest that AT to school among children
is directly influenced by the travel behavior, attitudes, and
beliefs of their parents. These findings also highlight the
importance of improving AT correlates among adults to
increase AT among their children, suggesting the importance 
of partnerships between community coalitions focused
on AT, schools, worksites, urban planners and public health
officials for addressing walking and biking participation
across the lifespan.
