Factors affecting mode choice for the
home––elementary school journey: Evidence
from Halifax, Canada

Most children are chauffeured to school, including many of those who live close to their school.
Distance significantly impacts elementary students’ travel mode choices for the home––school
journey, especially walk and bus modes.
Older and smaller elementary schools, especially in densely populated communities, tend to
encourage walking for the home––school commute.
This research investigates personal, school, neighbourhood, and weather characteristics that are associated
with travel mode choices for children’s direct journeys between home and school. Travel diary and sociodemographic 
data were collected from elementary school students aged 5 to 11 years in Halifax, Nova
Scotia, and were joined with characteristics about their respective school, neighbourhood, and weather.
Multinomial and mixed logistic regression were used to examine the relationships between these characteristics 
and choices between car, bus, and walk travel modes. Results indicate that personal, school,
neighbourhood, and weather characteristics all impact mode choice decisions, yet distance between home
and school is among the most signi<U+FB01>cant. To promote active travel between home and school, our <U+FB01>ndings
suggest that smaller elementary schools should be sited centrally within compact, high-density neighbourhoods 
that are designed for active travel, thereby minimizing school travel distances and maximizing the
practicality of active travel modes.

Introduction                                                           
									
The form and function of our neighbourhoods, as                        
well as the size and location of our schools, have                     
important social, economic, and environmental                          
impacts, plus significant implications for public                      
health policy. For example, among the current                          
generation of schoolchildren, mounting evidence                        
suggests a dramatic decline in rates of active travel                  
(AT) modes, namely walking and cycling, for the                        
journey between home and school (McDonald 2007,                        
2008; Grow et al. 2008; Babey et al. 2009; Buliung                     
et al. 2009; Wendel and Dannenberg 2009; Botchway                      
et al. 2014; McDonald, Salvesen, et al. 2014).                         
Decreased rates of AT and levels of physical activity                  
may be partially due to automobile-oriented urban                      
design (Forsyth and Southworth 2008), but recent                       
school siting policies and decisions, particularly the                 
locations where new schools are built (Lees et al.                     
2008; McDonald, Salvesen, et al. 2014; Kim and Lee                     
2016), have also led to increased distances between                    
students’ homes and their schools. The obvious                         
consequence of these school siting policies and                        
decisions is that fewer students live within legislated 
maximum walking distances (viz. minimum                          
distance for bus service), and thus must be driven to                    
and from school by either car or bus. From an AT                       
perspective, it appears that school siting policies                    
and decisions are disconnected from, and uncoordinated 
with, not only other planning decisions but                    
also current policy directions and academic discourse 
in community planning (McDonald 2010;                           
Spinney and Millward 2011a).                                           
Regardless of the cause for current low rates of AT                 
for the home––school commute, the problem with an                      
increasing proportion of children being chauffeured 
is a commensurate decrease in the potential                     
opportunities for children to regularly engage in                      
physical activity (Strong et al. 2005; Deka and Von                    
Hagen 2015). As the journey between home and                          

school is the most common travel activity among
Canadian children (Stefan and Hunt 2006), it
provides the most prevalent opportunity for children 
to regularly engage in physical activity (Binns
et al. 2009). While we are reminded by Sirard and
Slater (2008) that it is not possible to establish
causal relationships between being chauffeured to
school, decreased levels of physical activity, and
increased prevalence of childhood obesity, today’s
generation of schoolchildren is less physically
active and increasingly prone to obesity (Tremblay
and Willms 2003; Frank et al. 2004; Janssen et al.
2006; Ewing et al. 2011; Botchway et al. 2014). Yet,
there is convincing evidence that suggests children
who walk to school are more physically active than
others (Frank et al. 2005; Cooper et al. 2010; Voss
and Sandercock 2010). Regardless of the relationships 
with obesity or physical activity, AT provides
important opportunities for children to benefit
from exposure to nature (Louv 2005), develop
responsibility, explore and interact with their
neighbourhood, and foster independence (Bean
et al. 2008; Fusco et al. 2012; Larsen et al. 2015),
while also reducing environmental impacts associated 
with increased automobile use (Stewart 2011).
Since the pioneering works by Beaumont and
Pianca (2002), there have been decades of mounting
evidence documenting the many social, economic,
and environmental benefits of AT, which has
contributed to a growing interest in the journey
between home and school among academic
researchers, public health officials, and urban
planners alike. Consequently, several programs
and policies are being developed and major investments 
are being made to help promote AT in
general, and active school travel (AST) in particular.
For example, the “Active and Safe Routes to School”
program (McDonald, Steiner, et al. 2014; Active and
Safe Routes to School 2018) used the school travel
plan (STP) to encourage AT through improved

public education programs about traffic safety,
better engineering of the pedestrian and cycling
environment, enforcement of traffic laws, encouragement 
to participate in AT, and evaluation of STP
efforts (the five E’s). It is noteworthy that such
programs are based on the hypothesis that mode
choice decisions for children’s journey between
home and school are influenced by characteristics
of the built environment (e.g., Braza et al. 2004;
Frank et al. 2006; Schlossberg et al. 2006; Larsen
et al. 2009). However, we are cautioned by McMillan
(2007) and by Larsen et al. (2009) of the limitations
of the evidence to support such a hypothesis.
Moreover, Mitra and Buliung (2015, 4) point out
that empirical results “are sometimes at odds with
each other, particularly with regard to the influence
of the neighbourhood environment.” These oftenconflicting 
results are indicative of the complexities
of the mode choice decision-making process and the
challenge of empirically disentangling the influence
of local contextual conditions (including the built
environment) on those decisions.
If public health interventions, community planning 
policies (including school siting), and neighbourhood 
design practices are to produce a positive
change in mode choice decisions, it is first necessary
to better understand the locally relevant factors
impacting schoolchildren’s commuting patterns.
The consequences have important social, economic,
environmental, and public health implications. If
the goal is to promote physical activity, there is a
need to provide programing and policies that
remove barriers and promote the conditions necessary 
for children and their parents to choose active
modes of transportation (Osborne 2005; McMillan
2007; Cooper et al. 2010; McDonald 2010; Napier
et al. 2011). However, the socio-ecological model of
health behaviours (Sallis and Owen 1997) posits that
multiple layers of intrapersonal, social, and physical
environment variables influence an individual’s
behaviours. The perceived intrapersonal, social,
and physical environment barriers vary widely
among children and their parents, which makes
the multi-layered mode choice decision-making
process highly complex (Faulkner et al. 2010);
recent review articles have summarized the literature 
pertaining to active modes of home––school
transportation (Davison et al. 2008; Sirard and
Slater 2008; Stewart 2011; D’Haese et al. 2015;
Wang et al. 2016) and they all appear to indicate that
more empirical evidence is needed. In fact, several

authors have noted the lack of empirical evidence
concerning the correlates of transportation-related
physical activity (Merom et al. 2006; Schlossberg
et al. 2006; Duncan et al. 2016). Related to work by
Easton and Ferrari (2015), who used multi-level
modelling of personal, school, and neighbourhood
factors in Sheffield, United Kingdom, this research
tested a set of a priori hypotheses to provide further
empirical evidence regarding the relative impacts of
personal, school, neighbourhood, and weather
characteristics on mode choice decisions for children’s 
journeys between their home and elementary
school in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Data description

The data employed in this study are derived from a
sample of 1,971 randomly selected households
within Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM) that
voluntarily participated in the STAR (Space-Time
Activity Research) survey between April 2007 and
May 2008 with a response rate of 21%. Most AST
studies employ recall questionnaires or hands-up
classroom tallies, which can be both unverifiable
and unreliable. In contrast, the Halifax STAR survey
deployed travel diaries to capture information
about travel times, purposes, modes, social contacts,
and locations that were rigorously validated against
the diary data of other household members. The data
collection process began with a pre-notification
letter being sent to each randomly sampled residential 
address to inform the household members
they had been chosen to participate and should
anticipate a telephone call within the next few days.
A computer-assisted telephone interview was used
to recruit each household and to collect demographic
information about all household members. A randomly 
selected household member over the age of 15
acted as the primary respondent and this individual
completed a GPS-assisted time-diary instrument. All
other household members over the age of 5 were
asked to complete 48-hour travel diaries, with proxy
reporting allowed by parents or guardians for
respondents under the age of consent.
Self-reported travel diary surveys have been the
standard data collection tool used by transportation
researchers for the last half century. The travel diary
used in the STAR survey captured the dynamic
location, travel modes between locations, the
activities performed at each location, and the start

and end times at each location for a 48-hour
reporting period. The completed diaries were
returned the day after their reporting period and
subsequently converted into digital format. During
the data-entry process, each location was geocoded
(i.e., assigned latitude and longitude coordinates)
using a linked gazetteer. The home and school
coordinates, and attributes, were entered into

TransCAD along with a street network file to
compute objective street network travel distances
in metres, assuming two-way travel on all streets.
This research is concerned with mode choice
decisions for elementary school students, who were
defined as respondents between the age of 5
(starting Primary) and 11 (starting Grade 6) years
and proxy reported “student” as their main activity.
Since the school board policy in Halifax is to provide
busing services to elementary school (Grades
Primary through 6) children who live beyond
2,400 metres of their school, we chose to further
limit our analysis to elementary schoolchildren who
reside within 2,400 metres (shortest-path road
distance) of their school. The result was 195
elementary schoolchildren who engaged in 913
school-related trips (26.5% of all trips) that
resemble a proportional distribution over all
10 months of the school year (i.e., September through
June).
A cross-tabulation of origins and destinations was
used to further limit our analysis to only “direct”
trips between home and school (DHS trips), which
account for 70.1% of all elementary schoolchildren’s
school-related trips. We recognize that this eliminates 
multi-modal trips (2.2%), multi-destination
trip chains (4.2%), and intermediate stops at someone 
else’s home (10.1%) on the way either to or
from school (e.g., babysitter, siblings’ school). The
remaining sample, and the prevailing unit of
analysis, is 383 DHS trips (221 home-to-school
and 162 school-to-home) that were taken by 195
elementary school students. The elementary schoolchildren’s 
travel mode choices were: 147 car trips
(as passenger); 67 bus trips (mostly school bus); and
169 walk trips. It is noteworthy that bicycle was
reported for only 69 (2.4%) of the elementary
schoolchildren’s trips, and for only 7 (0.8%) of their
school-related trips. Therefore, bicycle trips were
excluded from this analysis.
The 383 DHS trips examined herein either
originated or terminated at one of 50 different
elementary schools throughout the county-sized

study area, whose geographic coordinates were
collected and validated. Information about each
school was retrieved from the Halifax Regional
School Board website (www.hrsb.ns.ca) for the
public schools, and the Conseil Scolaire Acadien
Provincial website (www.csap.ednet.ns.ca) for the
sole reported French language school. Specifically,
we retrieved information about the date of construction 
for each school building, the size of the
building(s) in square metres (not available for the
French school), and total student enrollment in
2007. These school characteristics were joined with
the travel diary information.
Neighbourhood features refer to the social,
economic, and built environments surrounding
each of the 50 schools attended by the respondents.
We used Statistics Canada’s 2006 census data,
reported at both the dissemination area and census
tract scales, to summarize and the area-level socioeconomic 
neighbourhood for all census tracts
substantially within 2,400 metre buffers around
each school. Based on preliminary analysis, we
chose population density, in persons per square
kilometre, at the dissemination area scale, plus two
variables at the census tract scale: apartments as
percent of private occupied dwellings and weighted
mean age of dwellings. We also used ESRI ArcGIS 9.3
software to compute several neighbourhood-level
metrics to characterize both the transportation
infrastructure and land use patterns within the
2,400-metre buffers around each school. Specifically, 
we computed (a) street density using a ratio of
four-way intersections to all intersections, (b)
density of sidewalks (ratio of sidewalk length to
road length), and (c) an entropy index to measure
the variety of different land uses. The entropy
index was computed using six land uses based
on work by Frank et al. (2006). Furthermore, due to
the well-established impact of travel distance on
mode choice decisions, and despite the inherent
limitations (e.g., Duncan and Mummery 2007;
Buliung et al. 2013; Zhu and Levinson 2015), we
also calculated the shortest-path street network
distances between each student’s home and their
school.
We hypothesized that mode choice decisions for
DHS trips are impacted generally by the seasons
(Fall, Winter, Spring) and specifically by mechanical
and/or thermal comfort (i.e., inclement weather).
Data from the weather station at Halifax Stanfield
International Airport (44° 53.0’ N, 63° 31.0’ W,

with 145.4 metre elevation) were downloaded,
formatted, and joined with the travel diary data.
More specifically, the weather data include daily
temperature (min., max., mean); total precipitation,
total rainfall, and total snowfall reported in millimetres; 
maximum wind speed; and depth of
accumulated snow on the ground. The ambient
weather data were joined to the travel diary data
based on the date information.

Mode choice model

Model formulation
The discrete choice model presented in this section
was formulated to quantify the significant factors
that help explain the mode choice behaviour of
elementary schoolchildren’s DHS trips. The model
predicts the probability of a student choosing car
(C), bus (B), or walk (W) travel modes. Let Uin be the
utility associated with travelling student n and
mode i:

where Vin is a linear-in-parameter function that
depends on observed factors characterizing student
n and mode i, and ein is an unobserved error term.
The mode choice probability Pin can be formulated
as the popular Multinomial Logit Model (MNL)
shown in equation 1 if the error terms ein are iid
(for all i and n) and follow the Gumbel distribution.

Although the MNL has been employed extensively
in mode choice analysis in the past, the application
of the Mixed Logit Model (MXL) has become more
commonplace in the recent literature (Santos et al.
2013; Noland et al. 2014; Khan et al. 2016). The basic
advantage of the MXL is its ability to capture the
impacts of unobserved heterogeneity among
the modelled decision makers (Train 2009). Also,
the MXL remedies the issue of serial correlation that
is usually present in travel diaries or panel data
(Daniels and Hensher 2000; Hensher et al. 2005).
Unlike the MNL model, the MXL model assumes that
the impact of a particular covariate in the utility

function varies among the modelled decision makers. 
That is, the parameter b associated with a given
covariate is not a fixed-point value, but rather it
varies among the heterogeneous and unobserved
groups of travelling children. Assuming b follows
some known distribution <U+0424> (e.g., normal distribution), 
the mode choice probability Pin can then be
formulated as the weighted probability across all
possible b’s pertaining to <U+0424>, that is:

Model speci<U+FB01>cation
The specification of the utility functions forming
the mode choice models, shown in equations 1 or 2,
is based on the four groups of variables that
represent the personal, school, neighbourhood,
and weather characteristics for the 383 DHS trips
made by 195 elementary school students who reside
within 2,400 metres of their school. The objective
was to test a set of a priori hypotheses and to explain
mode choice behaviour for elementary students’
DHS trips. Table 1 lists the variables used in the
formulation of the mode choice models.
Based on preliminary analysis of personal characteristics, 
we hypothesize that older students (at
least 9 years old) are less likely to be chauffeured to
school, either by their parents or the bus driver, as a
sign of independence. We also postulate that
families who earn more than $60,000 are more
likely to drive their children to school, as are
ð1Þ  families who own two or more cars.

These school characteristics were used to test two
hypotheses: students attending larger schools and
students enrolled in newer schools are less likely to
walk. Compared to older schools, which are typically 
in the older and more dense areas of the study
area, newer schools tend to be larger and more
prevalent in suburban areas, which tend to be more
auto-oriented in general and as such are less
conducive to walking (Gurwitt 2004).
Regarding the impact of neighbourhood characteristics, 
we hypothesized that school catchment
areas with high-density neighbourhoods tend to be
smaller and more compact, which means that more
students live closer to their school, thus encouraging 
walking. Likewise, schools in areas with older

dwellings are typically smaller and more closely
spaced, thus encouraging walking. Schools in areas
with a higher percentage of apartments are assumed
to have a higher population density and thus are
expected to encourage walking—but may also be
newer, more suburban, and thus encourage more
driving. Finally, based on work by Cervero and
Kockelman (1997), Larsen et al. (2009), Curtis et al.
(2015), and Neatt et al. (2017), we hypothesized
that areas with a high level of entropy (i.e., mixed
land uses) may be more conducive to walking.
However, this effect may not be an independent
one, since high entropy tends to be correlated to
neighbourhood vintage, population density, and
neighbourhood design. Moreover, the effects are
complex and have varying impacts on different
groups of people (e.g., age) and different types of
walking (commute vs. recreation). Nonetheless, the
notion that mixed land uses increases the practicality 
of walking remains a central tenet of the theory
and practice of community planning and neighbourhood 
design. Finally, the distribution of homeschool 
trips over all 10 months of the school year
provided an opportunity to control for daily
weather conditions and seasonal climate variations.
For example, we hypothesized that meteorological
conditions that pose major mechanical or thermal
discomfort (e.g., raining or too cold) may also pose a
barrier to walking.

Modelling results and discussion

Table 2 presents the results of four MNL mode
choice models and one MXL model that were
estimated using the NLOGIT 5.0 econometric software. 
The MNL models were estimated under
different utility specifications. While the first four
models test the respective impacts that individual,
school, neighbourhood, and weather characteristics
have on the mode choice for DHS trips, the fifth
model combines all factors into one pooled model.
The MXL model uses the same specification as
the MNL model, but it relaxes the assumption of
fixed point parameters to account for unobserved
heterogeneity in the modelled sample.
The results suggest well-behaved MNL models as
discerned from the signs of the estimated parameters 
and the achieved adjusted rho-square values.
The results from the first four MNL models clearly
suggest that the neighbourhood factors have the
highest explanatory and predictive power in the
model with an adjusted rho-square of 0.26 and 54%
predicted correctly. By comparison, socio-economic
characteristics rank second in terms of their
explanatory and predictive power. School attributes
exert the least impact on the explanation of the
observed mode choice behaviour.
Model results support most of our hypotheses for
participant characteristics. For example, model

results indicate that students (or more correctly
their parents) are significantly less likely to choose
car for DHS travel as the child gets older. This
decision may relate to greater parental ease regarding 
sensible behaviour and safety, augmented with
pressure for independence from the child. The
model also indicates that older girls (9 through 11
years) are more likely to ride the bus than younger
girls, and an increased share of car trips for families
with incomes over $60,000 and those who own two
or more cars.
Regarding the school characteristics, the model
supports the widely held notion that both newer and
larger schools fail to encourage walking. For example, 
newer schools tend to be larger buildings and,
expectedly, have larger student populations, and
they also tend to be located on larger lots that are
typically located on the outskirts of the community
(Lees et al. 2008; Cohen 2010; Ewing et al. 2011;
McDonald, Salvesen, et al. 2014; Kim and Lee 2016),

which are consequently much less accessible by
active travel modes. The process of building large
schools on the outskirts of our communities is
widely acknowledged as “school sprawl” (McMahon
2000).
Regarding the neighbourhood characteristics,
model results support all our hypotheses and
indicate the most significant neighbourhood feature 
(t ¼ 9.5 in the MNL model) is the distance
between home and school. School siting has direct
implications for the distances students are required
to travel, which mainly impact walk and bus modes
(Jensen 2008; Binns et al. 2009; Ewing et al. 2011;
Spinney and Millward 2011a; McDonald, Salvesen,
et al. 2014; Deka and Von Hagen 2015). Also
significant was population density, and to a lesser
extent the percentage of apartment dwellings: both
are positively associated with walk mode choices.
Interestingly, the entropy variable was positive and
significant when introduced on its own in the walk

utility, but its significance started diminishing in the
presence of additional variables. Furthermore, the
parameter switched sign, suggesting it is highly
correlated with one or more of the other utilized
variables. As such, entropy was excluded from the
final specification of the models.
Model results indicate that neither snow on the
ground nor wind speed (mechanical comfort) nor
mean daily temperature (thermal comfort) exhibited 
a statistically significant impact on mode choice
decisions, other things being equal, and were
dropped from the final model specification. Model
results also indicate, intuitively and expectedly,
total rainfall was positive and significant for the car
mode. Moreover, the combined impact of weather,
especially comparing the fall (September through
December) and winter (January through June)
semesters of the school year, exhibits a positive
and significant impact on walking during the fall
semester. Given the difficulty disentangling the
combined impacts of weather variables, the cumulative 
impacts of weather may be better characterized 
by an hourly composite index that focusses on
inclement weather (Spinney and Millward 2011b)
that uses both objective measurements, such as
a “weather score” (McGinn et al. 2007), and subjective 
measurements, such as “perceived weather”
(McGinn et al. 2007; Shao 2016).
When the personal, school, neighbourhood, and
weather variables are combined in the pooled
models, inter-correlations are identified and the
separate effects of the variables are isolated. As
seen in Table 2, the pooled MNL model reveals the
overriding importance of the neighbourhood variables 
on the choice to walk, and most particularly
the negative effect of distance to school and the
positive effect of population density. These two
variables are also important in the pooled MXL
model, but to a lesser degree. Interestingly, intersection 
density has an inhibiting effect on walking in
both models, presumably related to road safety
concerns.
In both pooled models, car ridership is strongly
related to two key socio-economic variables: negatively 
to child age, and positively to high household
income. In contrast, older female child has a modest
positive effect on bus ridership, while ownership of
two or more cars has a barely significant positive
effect on car ridership. Household size is insignificant 
in both pooled models. The two school
attributes of age and size tend to change in the

pooled models and barely figure in the pooled MNL
model; age is insignificant while size is barely
significant. However, the mixed model suggests
the presence of heterogeneity effect in the school
age variable. While the mean value of the school age
coefficient is not significant (i.e., mean equals zero),
the standard deviation is 1.80, which suggests that
the propensity to choose walking varies widely
among students. The latter could be due to the
locational difference of newly developed schools in
Halifax, which lends itself to the unobserved
heterogeneity in the choice of active transport by
students, other things being equal. Interestingly, the
large-school variable in the pooled mixed logit
model becomes significant and positive. Perhaps
this could be due to the nature of larger schools,
which are more likely to attract a disproportionate
number of students who prefer to walk, other things
being equal. In general, school characteristics are
not independent from the neighbourhoods in
which they are sited. In Halifax, older and smaller
schools tend to be located in high-density inner-city
areas, thus affording their students shorter walking
distances.
The presence of unobserved heterogeneity manifests 
itself in the percentage of apartments coefficient. 
The results pertaining to the mean and
standard deviation of this parameter in the mixed
logit model suggest that the propensity to choose
car varies among the population of students.
Meaning, not all students and their families have
the same tendencies with respect to their choice for
car travel. Again, this could be attributed to the
location of the apartments where the students and
their parents live with respect to where the schools
are located. The two pooled models both account for
a large proportion of variation in student mode
choices, as indicated by their high and similar
adjusted rho values (0.452 for MNL and 0.517 for
MXL). Both models correctly predict 69% of mode
choices.

Concluding remarks

The primary purpose of this research was to
investigate the personal, school, neighbourhood,
and weather characteristics that impact travel mode
choices for elementary schoolchildren’s direct trips
between their home and school in Halifax, Nova
Scotia. The study reported here represents one of

the first to comprehensively examine travel mode
choices for Halifax schoolchildren by using MNL and
MXL to analyze a wide range of personal, school,
neighbourhood, and weather characteristics. We
recognize there are also psychological, social,
environmental, physical, and attitudinal factors,
which vary among the different actors, each with
their own perspectives and schedules (e.g., Black
et al. 2001; Susilo and Liu 2016; Yu and Zhu 2016)
that collectively influence mode choice decisions.
We also recognize that this research may benefit
from separately modelling the journey to school
and the journey from school, because the trip to
school is often, and in many ways, different from the
trip home from school (Buliung et al. 2009; Larsen
et al. 2009; Buliung et al. 2013), owing mostly to the
scheduling of parents’ journeys between home and
work (Faulkner et al. 2010; Carver et al. 2013). Based
on the relationship between the students, school,
neighbourhood, and weather characteristics and the
travel mode choices examined herein, we may
conclude that other variables are required to more
fully explain mode choice decisions.
This study has revealed the key role played by
home-to-school distance as a predictor of walk
choices, which corroborates findings of most
previous studies (e.g., Schlossberg et al. 2006;
Cole et al. 2007; McDonald 2007, 2008; Spinney
and Millward 2011a; Curtis et al. 2015; Olaru and
Curtis 2015). However, we used a fairly coarse
spatial resolution for the distance measurement,
and we failed to incorporate pedestrian/multi-use
pathways even though we recognize the actual
route travelled may significantly differ (Dessing
et al. 2016). Closer examination of the distances
between a respondent’s home and their school
could offer more nuanced insights into the impact
of distance on walk modes. In future work, it might
be instructive to empirically construct distance
decay models for different neighbourhood types,
and thereby predict “walksheds” for the journey to
school for different neighbourhood types. Such
research may provide valuable information for
future discussions on neighbourhood design and
school location policy and practice, and on walking
distance threshold policies for different age
groups.
Neighbourhood population density is another
important predictor of choosing to walk. Highdensity 
neighbourhoods often contain more children 
and allow more closely spaced schools, and

hence more children living within easy reach of their
school. High-density areas tend to be in the inner
city, and thus tend to have both older and smaller
schools. The smallest elementary schools (in both
building size and number of students) have the
highest rates of walking, with almost two-thirds of
the students choosing to walk. Though the multivariate 
models suggest that age and size of school
have negligible proximate effects, beyond their
relationship to the two neighbourhood variables,
small schools can be sited closer to each other, and
hence act as the root cause in reducing hometoschool 
distances. The results of this research,
therefore, support suggestions made by others
(Timperio et al. 2006; Babey et al. 2009; McDonald
2010; McDonald, Salvesen, et al. 2014; Curtis et al.
2015; Olaru and Curtis 2015; Kim and Lee 2016),
recommending the siting of smaller community
schools either in or adjacent to residential areas that
are densely populated with school-aged children.
However, as we discovered in this study, many
children who live within close proximity to their
school are chauffeured between home and school by
car. The MNL and MXL results show that two key
predictors of the car mode choice are the child’s age
and the household income. Again, to some extent
these are proximate causes, and the root causes may
relate more to issues of perceived child maturity
and traffic safety (related to age), or to automobile
and parental availability (related to income) (see
Carver et al. 2013). Therefore, developing interventions 
aimed at promoting active transportation
must address not only the siting of schools, but
also the objective and perceived barriers to walking
(and cycling) faced by different groups of schoolchildren 
(Kim and Heinrich 2016; Wendel and
Dannenberg 2009; Yeung et al. 2008). For example,
it is necessary to also improve the safety of the
pedestrian environment to promote increased use
of AT (Merom et al. 2006; Carver et al. 2013;
McGowan et al. 2016). Much of the focus appears
to be on improved design of the pedestrian
environment, but if the focus was on increasing
AT rates for the journey between home and
school, infrastructure improvements and programs
to encourage bicycling should have the greatest
potential impact. This is because under the right
conditions a reasonable walking distance for elementary 
schoolchildren may be about 400 metres
(one-quarter of a mile) or upwards of 800 metres
under the right conditions for older students.

However, a bicyclist can cover about three times the
distance of walking in the same amount of time
(Jones et al. 2013). Therefore, a reasonable bicycling
distance should be 1,200 metres for elementary
schoolchildren and upwards of 2,400 metres for the
oldest students, under the right conditions. Our
data showed that bicycling is clearly an underutilized 
mode option in our study area, so it is
reasonable to suspect infrastructure improvements
and programs to encourage bicycling may have
significant untapped potential.
Improving school siting and traffic safety requires
interdisciplinary reasoning among decision makers,
who do not always fully appreciate the implications
of neighbourhood design or school siting decisions
for transportation planning, public health, nor the
social, economic, and environmental costs. This
challenge is made more difficult by the requirement
that developers, planners, and policy makers
understand the needs of children (Cohen 2010;
Curtis et al. 2015) and reconcile children’s needs
with the needs of the broader community (Bishop
and Corkery 2017). For example, if the primary
purposes of school-siting are to provide a variety of
educational programs and sporting opportunities,
economies of scale will inevitably require a largecampus 
design, intended for automobile and school
bus traffic, and it will inevitably be spatially
separated from many the community members it
services. However, if the primary purposes of schoolsiting 
are to service neighbourhood children, to
promote active transportation as a means of increasing 
the levels of physical activity among children, and
to reduce traffic congestion and its consequent
environmental and public health impacts (e.g., traffic
safety, air quality), the school should be small, well
incorporated into the scale and design of the built
environment, and located within a reasonable distance 
of the neighbourhood children it services. Such
a residential design model accords with the “neighbourhood 
unit” proposed by Perry (1929), whereby
centrally located schools (within a quarter-mile, or
402 metres) also act as a local community centre for
people of all ages and a wide range of after-school,
evening, and weekend activities. McDonald (2010)
warns that the incorporation of school siting into
local and regional planning requires community
planners to be cognizant of this neighbourhoodversuscommunity 
issue.
We agree that AST promotion is one of many
important considerations in school siting and that

educational and financial considerations should
take priority. School boards typically consider a
variety of competing requirements, such as the
size of the property, land affordability, demographics, 
stability of student population, attendance 
boundaries and configuration, and travel
distance (Tsai and Miller 2005). However, the longterm 
trend to larger schools spaced farther apart,
which deters AST, has also been contested on
educational and community-use grounds, and
there is a movement to return to smaller community 
schools, serving more localized neighbourhoods (McDonald 2010).
This research has demonstrated that neighbourhood 
characteristics alone do not dictate mode
choice decisions. Moreover, this research has also
demonstrated that despite its near ubiquity among
children, home––school travel comprises only a
relatively small share of all their travel activities.
To encourage active travel by youth to a wide variety
of destinations, including elementary schools, we
therefore need to focus not simply on community
planning policies that include better school sizing
and siting, but also more broadly on improved
urban design practices and successful behavioural
intervention programs. These conclusions are likely
to be valid and applicable in all urban-focussed
school districts in Canada, though the specifics of
their implementation will need to respect local
context.