Common ground: Eight factors that in<U+FB02>uence walking and biking to school

The primary goals of Safe Routes to School (SRTS) programs are to increase the number and safety of
children walking, biking or using other forms of active travel to school (ATS). This study reviewed
quantitative and qualitative research and identi<U+FB01>ed eight common factors that in<U+FB02>uenced the choice of
ATS: distance to school, parental fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime, family schedule constraints and values,
neighborhood and family resources and culture, weather, and school characteristics. Suggestions were
made as to how these barriers and facilitators of ATS could be integrated into the decision to fund local
SRTS programs and to improve their effectiveness.

1. Introduction                                                                         
												
Walking, biking and other forms of active travel to school                         
(ATS) are a convenient way for children to improve their health                         
and reduce their environmental impact. Regular ATS is associated                            
with increased levels of physical activity, which helps prevent                         
chronic diseases related to inactivity, such as obesity and type II                     
diabetes (Fulton et al., 2005; Heelan et al., 2005; Saksvig et al.,                     
2007; Sirard et al., 2005b). To the extent that walk and bike trips                     
offset automobile trips to school, ATS also mitigates air, noise, and                   
other forms of automobile pollution (EPA, 2003). Despite these                              
potential personal and societal bene<U+FB01>ts, rates of ATS in the U.S.                       
have declined, from 47.7 percent in 1969 to 12.7 percent in 2009,                       
while rates of students being driven to school in the family car                        
have increased in mirrored proportions (McDonald et al., 2011).                         
This trend is believed to have contributed to the childhood                             
obesity epidemic and increased traf<U+FB01>c congestion during the                            
school commute (Hubsmith, 2006). The federal Safe Routes to                             
School (SRTS) program seeks to reverse these trends.                                    
Established in 2005 under SAFETEA-LU, the SRTS program is a                        
national effort to enable and encourage children to safely walk and                     
bike to school. The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) allocates 
SRTS funds to all 50 States and the District of Columbia. State                   
Departments of Transportation (DOTs) award funds to SRTS program 
proposals submitted by local agencies such as municipalities,                      
school districts, or non-pro<U+FB01>t organizations. SRTS programs are                        
designed to increase the numbers and safety of children walking                             
and biking to school through some combination of the <U+FB01>ve                                
													
Es: engineering, enforcement, education, encouragement, and evaluation. 
Each state must allocate 70 to 90 percent of its FHWA SRTS
funds to infrastructure; the remainder must be spent on noninfrastructure 
activities (Hubsmith, 2006).
Most State DOTs receive SRTS proposals that far exceed their
available funding. As of December 2011, state DOTs have
announced nearly $691.3 million in awards for SRTS programs.
This represents only 39 percent of the approximately $2 billion in
SRTS funding requested through grant applications (National
Center for Safe Routes to School (NCSRTS), 2011).
To best allocate scarce SRTS resources, state SRTS coordinators
need tools to select proposals with the greatest potential for
success. Successful SRTS programs will increase the safety and/or
number of children walking or biking to school and result in
corollary bene<U+FB01>ts such as improved health, reduced congestion,
and better air quality. The greatest number of children can be
expected to safely walk or bike to school where few barriers and
many facilitators to ATS exist. Therefore, SRTS funding will be
most ef<U+FB01>ciently spent at locations where few barriers and several
facilitators to ATS already exist and only minor modi<U+FB01>cations are
necessary to create a completely supportive pedestrian and
bicycle environment. Knowledge of common barriers and facilitators 
of ATS would thus help state SRTS coordinators to identify
existing conditions that affect rates of ATS for each SRTS grant
application, as well as opportunities for removing barriers and
establishing facilitators.
This study identi<U+FB01>es common barriers and facilitators that
in<U+FB02>uence the household decision to use active transportation to
school. Numerous studies have investigated correlates of active
travel to school and several review articles have summarized the
<U+FB01>ndings of past research (Davison, et al., 2008; Sirard and Slater,
2008; Faulkner et al., 2009; Pont et al., 2009; Stewart, 2011). This

article contributes to the knowledge base by employing the
results of both correlational and qualitative research to develop
a short list of common factors that in<U+FB02>uence the commute mode
to school decision. This list captures a range of contextual factors
that directly or indirectly affect that decision. It also serves as a
guide for SRTS practitioners to assess the relevance of each factor
within individual states, regions, or school-based communities
and to help steer SRTS program design accordingly.

2. Methods

Two bodies of research were reviewed to identify common
factors that act as barriers or facilitators to ATS. The <U+FB01>rst was
correlational studies of ATS. Correlational factors were derived
from a previous systematic literature review (Stewart, 2011). This
literature review of 42 studies identi<U+FB01>ed independent variables
that had been tested for a signi<U+FB01>cant association with ATS among
children aged 18 or younger. The independent variables were
organized into groups that measured similar phenomena. The
number of signi<U+FB01>cant and non-signi<U+FB01>cant relationships within
each correlate group is presented as an estimate of the importance 
of the relationship between each correlate group and ATS.
Second, qualitative research that explored reasons why parents 
or children did or did not use ATS was reviewed. This
research was used to identify common factors that parents and
children consider when choosing a commute mode to school and
provide a framework for better understanding the numerous
correlates of ATS and their complex relationships. A literature
review identi<U+FB01>ed publications that presented parent- or childreported 
factors that in<U+FB02>uenced their use of ATS. PubMed,
ScienceDirect, the National Transportation Library, and Active
Living Research databases were searched using relevant keywords
for articles published between 1997, the year of the <U+FB01>rst U.S. SRTS
program, and 2010 (Hubsmith, 2006). Articles were included if
they published self-reported barriers to ATS based on <U+FB01>ndings
from surveys or interviews that allowed for open-ended
responses to the question, ‘‘What prevents or helps you or your
child walk or bike to school?’’ From this research, themes that
repeatedly emerged were recorded as common factors.
Correlate groups that comprised common barriers and facilitators 
of ATS were organized according to the social ecological
model. The model helped identify multiple levels of in<U+FB02>uence on
behaviors, including individual, social, organizational, community, 
physical environment, and policy (Sallis et al., 2008). It was
applied to contextualize where the common barriers/facilitators
are located within these multiple levels of in<U+FB02>uence.

3. Literature review

3.1. Quantitative literature

Correlates of ATS were derived from a previously published
literature review (Stewart, 2011). The review covered 42 articles
and identi<U+FB01>ed 480 variables that had been tested for a statistically
signi<U+FB01>cant association with ATS. It organized the variables into 32
correlate groups that measured similar phenomena hypothesized
to in<U+FB02>uence the use of ATS. In the present study, these 32
correlate groups were classi<U+FB01>ed into 12 predominant domains
of in<U+FB02>uence within the social ecological model. Table 1 lists the 32
correlate groups and summarizes the number of signi<U+FB01>cant or not
signi<U+FB01>cant associations with ATS.

3.2. Qualitative literature

Five articles met the inclusion criteria for parent- and childreported 
barriers to ATS (Ahlport et al., 2008; Faulkner et al.,
2010; Greves et al., 2007; McDonald and Aalborg, 2009; Orsini
and O’Brien, 2006). Faulkner et al. (2010) used semi-structured
interviews of 20 parents who drove their children to school and
17 parents whose children walked to school. The parents were
drawn from elementary schools in the Greater Toronto Area that
varied on neighborhood socio-economic status (SES) and street
network type. Interviews were framed using the theory of
behavioral economics. Faulkner et al. found that although the
mode choice for travel to and from school was a habitual
behavior, much thought went into the initial decision to select a
mode. In making the choice, the <U+FB01>rst issue parents considered was
their child’s ability to travel alone to school based on his or her
capabilities to safely navigate traf<U+FB01>c and social interactions. This
determined if a walk or bike to school alone mode was even an
option. From the range of possible travel modes, parents generally
chose what they perceived to be the easiest and most convenient.
Convenience was based on travel time or distance as well as the
ease of dropping the child off at school on the way to work or to
wherever other family members needed to go. The chosen mode
was reinforced by experiences during the commute until a
habitual mode formed. The actual ease of getting a child to school

on time was the primary reinforcing experience. Health bene<U+FB01>ts
were sometimes identi<U+FB01>ed as a reinforcing factor. Some parents of
children that attended high-SES schools walked to school as part
of an overall healthy lifestyle, but most parents did not perceive
the walk to school as a signi<U+FB01>cant opportunity for physical
activity. Traf<U+FB01>c noise and volume were also found to make the
walk trip to school unpleasant for some children, providing
negative reinforcement for the walk mode choice. Travel mode
habits were sometimes interrupted by weather. Children who
usually walked were sometimes driven in bad weather, while
children who regularly drove sometimes walked in pleasant
weather. Occasionally snow contributed to the convenience of
walking because parents found it quicker to walk to school than
to shovel out the driveway.
Ahlport et al. (2008) used the socio-ecological and political
economy of health frameworks to analyze responses from semistructured 
focus groups with 37 parent and child pairs (11 nonATS and 26 ATS users) 
who lived within walking or bicycling
distance (1.5 mile) of four elementary schools in Central North
Carolina. Households considered personal safety concerns such as
fears of abduction, collisions, bullies, and immature judgment.
Because of these concerns, older siblings that attended the same
school and could walk with a younger child facilitated ATS, while
younger siblings that could not keep up or siblings that attended
different schools acted as barriers. In<U+FB02>exible work schedules acted
as barriers, especially in the mornings, while <U+FB02>exible work
schedules acted as facilitators. ATS was found to require a high
level of energy, strength, motivation, and commitment to the
health bene<U+FB01>ts of exercise and quality time outdoors. Environmental 
barriers to ATS included distance, weather, lack of sidewalks, 
and traf<U+FB01>c. School-based barriers included early start times
that would mean less sleep if children were to spend the extra
time to walk to school. Early start times also meant that children
would be walking in the dark part of the year, contributing to
safety concerns. Limited storage for jackets and bike helmets
were also a school-based barrier, as well as safety concerns due to
unorganized pick-up and drop-off zones and a lack of crossing
guards. School policies such as designated walker/rider programs,
grade minimums for walking or bicycling, rules against riding
push scooters to and from school, and policies requiring bicyclists
and walkers to wait to be dismissed until after the car riders leave
were also identi<U+FB01>ed as barriers.
Greves et al. (2007) used the socio-ecological model to identify
barriers to walking to school from focus groups with 53 immigrant 
parents and grandparents of elementary school-aged children 
from low-income neighborhoods in Seattle. Barriers were
classi<U+FB01>ed as fears, feasibility, and norms. Interpersonal fears
included fears of abduction, bullying, homeless people, and gangs.
Parents and guardians often did not know or trust their neighbors
due to language differences. Traf<U+FB01>c fears included heavy traf<U+FB01>c,
unsafe street crossings, and a lack of crossing guards or walking
paths. Feasibility fears were divided between distance, lack of
time, and weather. Many children did not live near their school or
found the route to be too dif<U+FB01>cult. Time constraints came in the
form of both parents working, too many kids to walk together, a
greater convenience in dropping children off while driving to
work, child care logistics before and after school, and choosing a
school further away based on a more convenient pick-up time.
Weather barriers included rain, cold, and darkness, especially in
winter months. Finally, guardians identi<U+FB01>ed a normative barrier
in that there was no necessity to walk and their children were not
accustomed to it.
McDonald and Aalborg (2009) conducted a telephone interview of
403 parents of children aged 10 to 14 in Bay Area locations with
walkable built environments, de<U+FB01>ned as the presence of gridded
streets, sidewalks, and <U+FB02>at topography. Households were within

2 mile of school. Researchers asked parents who drove their children
to school why they did so. Responses fell into two categories:
convenience and safety. Convenience responses included the perception 
that the school was too far away. Also, driving was considered
faster or more convenient; it let children sleep later; it ensured the
child arrived on time; and it allowed the parent to drop the child off
on the way to work or on the way to drop off others. The availability
of carpools and the lack of bus service also in<U+FB02>uenced convenience
responses. Safety responses included stranger danger, the child being
too young, or traf<U+FB01>c concerns. Two additional unclassi<U+FB01>ed responses
were that driving was the child’s preference and allowed the parent
to spend time with the child.
Orsini and O’Brien, 2006 used mixed methods to understand
why six 16- and 17-year olds cycled to school in Vancouver,
British Columbia. They found that cycling provided independence,
was faster and more fun than other modes of travel, and
contributed to <U+FB01>tness. These teenagers began cycling independently
between the ages of 4 and 12. They were motivated to do
so from older role models and continued to do so in part because
of encouragement from role models.
The <U+FB01>ve qualitative articles examined various populations using
various methods. Nonetheless, six recurring themes emerged from
these studies as factors that in<U+FB02>uenced the decision to use ATS
(Appendix 1):

distance to school,
parent’s fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime,
schedule constraints,
values,
weather, and
school characteristics and policies.

Worth noting is that distance, schedules, and values arose in
all <U+FB01>ve articles, whereas fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime was not reported
as an in<U+FB02>uence among teenage cyclists (Orsini and O’Brien, 2006)
and only three of the articles mentioned weather and school
characteristics or policies (Faulkner et al., 2010; Ahlport et al.,
2008; Greves et al., 2007). Barriers and facilitators reported
among households from different cultures, built environments
and SES strati<U+FB01>cations were similar (Faulkner et al., 2010; Greves
et al., 2007). The six common factors reported by parents and/or
children in qualitative studies were used as a framework to
understand how the 32 correlate groups of ATS in<U+FB02>uenced the
family decision for children to walk or bike to school and to
classify them into common factors that in<U+FB02>uence ATS.

4. Common factors

Twenty-six of the correlate groups were found to support one or
more of the six common factors that parents and/or children reported
to in<U+FB02>uence their decision to walk or bike to school. The remaining six
correlate groups were organized into two additional common factors:
resources and culture. Resources included parental employment
status and education, household income, car ownership, and neighborhood 
socio-economic status. Culture included foreign-born status,
race/ethnicity, and regional location. These two factors were not
explicitly reported by parents or children in qualitative studies but
were, however, incorporated into the design of two such studies
(Faulkner et al., 2010; Greves et al., 2007). This resulted in eight
common factors that acted as barriers or facilitators to ATS (Table 2).

4.1. Distance to school

Distance to school was often reported by parents and children as
a barrier, even among families that lived within walking distances

to school. It was also strongly and frequently associated with less
walking and biking to school when tested in correlational
research. Distance directly impacts the travel time each mode
requires and parents often chose the mode of shortest duration
(Faulkner et al., 2010). In a mode choice model based on a
nationally representative sample, a one-minute increase in the
time it took to walk to school led to a 0.2 percent decrease in
the likelihood of a child walking to school (McDonald, 2008a).
A strong negative relationship between distance to school and the
probability of ATS was found for trips shorter than a mile; beyond
1 mile rates of ATS were consistently low (McDonald, 2007b). At
distances greater than or equal to 2 mile, only 1.7 percent of K-8
graders walked or biked to school (McDonald et al., 2011).
Other built environment attributes which were signi<U+FB01>cantly
associated with ATS in correlational research likely also captured
effects similar to those of distance. Children were more likely to
walk or bike to school in mixed use, dense, urban, and highly
connected neighborhoods—places where schools or other destinations 
were likely to be closer to children’s homes. These
<U+FB01>ndings might also re<U+FB02>ect that walking and biking to school are
part of a general habit of walking to other neighborhood destinations 
(Dollman and Lewis, 2007). Neighborhood walkability was
also signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with greater levels of walking and
biking in all three studies testing its impact on ATS. When
measured objectively, walkability was an aggregate of measures
of residential density, retail <U+FB02>oor area ratio, intersection density,
and land use mix (Kerr et al., 2006). When measured subjectively,
it likely re<U+FB02>ected not only shorter distances to destinations, but
also routes that were comfortable and safe from traf<U+FB01>c and
criminal dangers (Yang et al., 2008).

4.2. Parental fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime

Parental fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime was frequently reported by
parents (Dellinger and Staunton, 2002; Martin and Carlson, 2005;
McDonald and Aalborg, 2009) and were evident in numerous
correlates of walking and biking to school. National statistics
justify traf<U+FB01>c safety concerns. Although child pedestrian and

bicyclist traf<U+FB01>c collision fatality rates have declined from 1987
to 2009 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2008;
National Highway Traf<U+FB01>c Safety Administration (NHTSA), 2011),
the reason behind the decline may be lower exposure, not
increased safety (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2008). Bicycling and walking were the two highest risk commute
modes to and from school when analyzed on the basis of exposure
(Transportation Research Board (TRB), 2002).
On the other hand, crime concerns may be based more on social
norms than actual risk. The rate of violent crime against 12- to 19year 
olds declined between 1973 and 2005 to 44 cases per 100,000
children (U.S. Department of Justice, 2006). Kidnapping makes up
only two percent of violent crimes against youth and only four
percent of all kidnappings occur around schools (Finklehor and
Ormrod, 2000). Yet parents often feared the worse, even if they knew
the odds of abduction were slim (Ahlport et al., 2008). These fears
have likely been fed by media reports of kidnappings (Greves et al.,
2007). Parents and guardians also mentioned fears of exposure to
other interpersonal risks, such as bullying, gang activity, or homelessness. 
These fears, however, were secondary to abduction or
violence (Ahlport et al., 2008; Greves et al., 2007). Regardless of
actual risks, letting a child travel alone is often stigmatized as an
indicator of neglectful or irresponsible parenthood (Greves et al.,
2007; O’Brien et al., 2000).
Built environment factors likely contributed to parental fears
of traf<U+FB01>c and criminal danger. The lack of pedestrian and bicycle
support facilities (including sidewalks, bike paths, walking trails,
street trees, lighting, and windows facing the street), the lack of
street network connectivity (which limits the option of walking
along streets that carry less traf<U+FB01>c), and various barriers along the
route (such as major streets and railroads) were sometimes
associated with lower use of ATS (Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008;
Kweon et al., 2007; Fulton et al., 2005; Kerr et al., 2006;
McMillan, 2007; Mota et al., 2007; Saksvig et al., 2007;
Schlossberg et al., 2006; Timperio et al., 2006).
Parental fears might also explain the correlational <U+FB01>ndings
that females were less likely to walk or bike to school than males.
Girls tend to be more protected from the outside world than boys:

they spend less time in the public urban setting, are more likely to
be supervised, and have a more restricted home range (O’Brien
et al., 2000; Valentine, 1997). The only time girls were found to be
more likely to walk to school than boys was when they were
accompanied by their mothers (Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008)
and the odds that girls walked less than boys was moderated by a
caregiver’s own walking behavior, (McMillan, 2005), suggesting
that when girls walk to school, they are usually accompanied.
Interestingly, gender was never reported as a barrier in the
qualitative research on ATS.
Young children may be especially vulnerable to traf<U+FB01>c and
criminal dangers due to their developing physical, cognitive and
psychosocial abilities. Experts advise that most children are not
ready to begin walking alone until age 10 (National Center for
Safe Routes to School (NCSRTS), 2008). Parents often cited age 12,
or when U.S. children enter the seventh grade, as the age when
their child would be allowed to walk or bike to school independently 
(Faulkner et al., 2010). This meant that through elementary
school, most children’s non-motorized transportation options
would be limited to walking with an adult and therefore their
mode of travel to school would be dependent on adult schedule
constraints and travel preferences. Children in middle school
might have a greater range of non-motorized travel modes, but
middle schools often have larger enrollments and attendance
areas, suggesting that many students at this age live far from their
school and may not easily walk the distance (Fulton et al., 2005).
The issue is exacerbated for high school students because these
schools are even further consolidated and motorized transportation 
options increase as students and peers obtain driver’s
licenses, enabling teens to drive solo or to carpool to school
(McDonald, 2007b). Cross-sectional studies captured the generally 
positive association between age and walking and biking to
school, which was tempered by the tendency for older students to
live further from their schools and have more motorized travel
options. A signi<U+FB01>cant negative correlation between age and ATS
was found in studies that included older students, aged nine to 18
(Pabayo and Gauvin, 2008; Tudor-Locke et al., 2003; Fulton et al.,
2005; Evenson et al., 2003; Scho<U+FB01>eld et al., 2005), while studies that
showed a signi<U+FB01>cant positive relationship focused on younger
students, aged <U+FB01>ve to 14 (Merom et al., 2006; McDonald, 2008a;
Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008; Timperio et al., 2006; Kweon et al., 2007;
Martin et al., 2007). Expectedly, children with a greater level of
independence were more likely to walk or bike to school (Merom
et al., 2006) and younger children were more likely to walk with
their mother, while older children were more likely to walk alone
(Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008). Children with more siblings were
sometimes more likely to walk or bike to school (Kweon et al., 2007;
McDonald, 2008a; McMillan, 2007), likely because older children
could chaperone younger children when their schools were along a
similar route.
Parent-reported concern of traf<U+FB01>c or criminal danger was
signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with ATS less often than were age, gender,
or most built environment pedestrian safety features. Because
safety concerns are a common and recurring theme reported by
both parents and children, it appears that some parents allow
their children to walk or bike to school despite such fears; and
that these fears persist as a child regularly walks or bikes to
school. This situation may be more common among lower SES
households that have few transportation options and live in
deprived neighborhoods that tend to have greater crime and
traf<U+FB01>c risks (Zhu and Lee, 2008). This might explain the counterintuitive 
<U+FB01>nding that children who thought it was unsafe to play
in their neighborhood were more likely to walk or bike to school
(Fulton et al., 2005). Further research using objective measures of
crime would help determine the extent to which ATS is based on
actual criminal activity or perceptions of such activity.

4.3. Schedule constraints

Schedule constraints, such as after-school activities or rigid
work schedules, were a common barrier to ATS reported by
parents and children. These constraints, however, were only
associated with lower ATS <U+FB01>ve of the 21 times they were tested
(Kweon et al., 2007; Martin et al., 2007; Yarlagadda and
Srinivasan, 2008). And three studies found greater schedule
constraints were signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with more ATS
(Evenson et al., 2003; Martin et al., 2007; Merom et al., 2006).
These mixed associations suggested that family schedules had an
impact on travel to school modes and were dependent on speci<U+FB01>c
circumstances, such as whether or not day care was available
before or after school (Greves et al., 2007); whether the child
could travel alone to school or had to be escorted (Faulkner et al.,
2010); how a parent’s work schedule aligns with a child’s school
schedule; and if there were other children in the family that
traveled to different locations.

4.4. Values

Values that place less importance on walking and biking were
associated with less walking and biking to school in six of the
seven times they were tested. Attitudes that were supportive of
physical activity in general were associated with ATS less frequently 
than attitudes toward walking and biking speci<U+FB01>cally.
Attitudes toward general physical activity were signi<U+FB01>cant in
eight out of 40 tests. This could be because not all parents see
the trip to school as an opportunity for physical activity (Faulkner
et al., 2010). These attitudes likely in<U+FB02>uenced how parents
arranged their schedules and responded to time constraints that
precluded them from walking with their children to or from
school. Parental values were also likely to impact other decisions
that had a downstream effect on the ease of walking or biking to
school, such as how close a family lived to their child’s school or
how many cars they owned (Black et al., 2001; Yang et al., 2008).

4.5. Weather

Weather was reported as both a barrier and a facilitator to
walking to school by parents and children. This paradox was
evident in <U+FB01>ndings from a national study where parents who
reported adverse weather as a barrier to walking and biking to
school, were more likely to have children that walked or biked
to school (Martin and Carlson, 2005). This is probably related to
situations where children who usually walk to school are often
driven when the weather is bad. Three other cross-sectional
studies in relatively warm climates found no association between
weather and ATS (Kweon et al., 2007; Sirard et al., 2005a; Ziviani
et al., 2004).

4.6. School characteristics

School characteristics can act as barriers to walking and biking.
Policies that prohibit or limit walking and biking to school were
reported as a barrier by parents in North Carolina (Ahlport et al.,
2008) and were found to be signi<U+FB01>cantly associated with less
walking and biking in a national sample (Martin and Carlson,
2005). Attendance at traditional, neighborhood public schools
(diGuiseppi et al., 1998; Merom et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2008)
were associated with more walking and biking to school, which
probably re<U+FB02>ected shorter distances from residences to these
types of schools. Parents and children reported chaotic drop-off
and pick up areas as both a barrier (due to safety concerns) and
facilitator (traf<U+FB01>c can cause the walk to school to be quicker than
the drive) (Ahlport et al., 2008). The latter part of this

phenomenon was captured in an urban London study that found a
perceived parking problem at school to be associated with more
walking and biking to school (Black et al., 2001). Classroom
storage areas for clothes and bicycle helmets were also reported
as a barrier to walking and biking to school, but were not tested in
the correlational research reviewed here.

4.7. Resources

Resources in a family or community were frequently associated
with ATS in correlational research. Many studies found that
children from families with a greater income (McDonald, 2007a,
2008b; Ewing et al., 2004; McMillan, 2007; Pabayo and Gauvin,
2008; Tudor-Locke et al., 2003; Yang et al., 2008), more educated
parents (Evenson et al., 2003; Martin et al., 2007; Mota et al.,
2007), higher parent employment status (Black et al., 2001; Mota
et al., 2007; Yeung et al., 2008), or a home in an area with a higher
socioeconomic status (McDonald, 2008b) were less likely to walk
or bike to school. A travel model using national data found that a
10% increase in household income led to a 2.6% decline in walking
and a 2% increase in being driven to school (McDonald, 2008a).
In qualitative research, parents did not identify <U+FB01>nancial
resources as a barrier or facilitator. However, parents in higher
SES neighborhoods reported using ATS as part of a healthy
lifestyle, while parents in lower SES neighborhoods reported
having little time to accompany children on the walk to school
(Faulkner et al., 2010). Resources appear to be an external factor
to the decision to walk or bike to school, which may be related to
the availability of private automobile and schedule constraints.

4.8. Culture

Culture in this paper, refers to measures of foreign-born status,
race/ethnicity, and regional location. Correlational results were
mixed, perhaps due to the inconsistent and imprecise measures.
One study reported signi<U+FB01>cantly more ATS among children of
foreign-born parents in the U.S. (McMillan, 2007); another
reported signi<U+FB01>cantly less ATS among children of foreign-born
parents in Canada (Pabayo and Gauvin, 2008); and four more
studies found no signi<U+FB01>cant association between foreign-born
parents, nationality, or language spoken at home and ATS
(Bringolf-Isler et al., 2008; McDonald, 2007b; McMillan, 2006;
Merom et al., 2006). Racial variations in walking to school
appeared to be due to other factors. Two studies using data from
separate nationally representative surveys initially found signi<U+FB01>cant 
differences in rates of ATS by racial groups, but these
differences lost signi<U+FB01>cance after controlling for individual and
neighborhood covariates such as distance to school, family
income, and population density (McDonald, 2008b; Martin
et al., 2007). Children living in the Southern U.S. were more likely
to walk to school than children living in the Northeast, which
could represent cultural norms but may also re<U+FB02>ect other regional
differences, such as climate and predominant urban development
patterns (Martin et al., 2007). Like resources, culture was not
directly reported as a barrier or facilitator to walking or biking to
school by parents or guardians in the review of qualitative
research. Immigrant parents and grandparents of diverse backgrounds 
reported similar barriers to walking and biking to school
as households from predominant cultural backgrounds, although
mistrust of neighbors was more pronounced amongst minority
groups due to cultural isolation (Greves et al., 2007). Thus culture
appears to moderate—or be moderated by—other factors that
directly in<U+FB02>uence the decision to use ATS.

5. Discussion of implications for SRTS

The eight common factors that in<U+FB02>uenced walking and biking
to school can be used by SRTS coordinators to select SRTS grant
applications that have the greatest potential to increase the
number of students safely walking and biking to school.

5.1. Distance to school

Children who live too far away from their school will simply
not walk and bike unless absolutely necessary. To increase rates
of safe walking and biking to a school, there must be a substantial
number of students living within a reasonable walking/biking
distance. One mile may be a reasonable threshold. At this
distance, a model based on trips to school of 6508 children aged
<U+FB01>ve to 13 in the U.S found that 19 percent of children were
estimated to walk to school, but at a distance of 2 mile, the
estimate dropped to <U+FB01>ve percent (McDonald, 2008a). Because
distance has a direct impact on walking or biking to school, the
number of students who live 1/4, 1/2, and 1 mile from school
would provide the best estimate of potential active commuters,
assuming children attended their neighborhood school. Data on
children’s home locations may be available from individual
schools or school districts. It could also be collected through
parent surveys available from the National Center for Safe Routes
to School (NCSRTS) (2010a). Methods have also been developed to
estimate this information using U.S. census data in a geographic
information system (Falb et al., 2007). The numbers of students
living near a school, along with data on rates of ATS to or from
school would provide SRTS administrators with estimates of the
number of students whose safety may be improved, and of the
potential number of students who could switch to an active commute
mode. These data would also be instrumental in supporting postprogram 
evaluations. Any changes in ATS can only be understood in
the context of how many students live within walking distance.
Different SRTS strategies might be necessary for schools with
many students who live beyond an easy walking distance. A SRTS
emphasis on biking, safe routes to bus stops or walking from bus
stops to schools are examples of activities that can support safe
active travel for children who live far from schools (Safe Routes to
School National Partnership, 2007). However, the return on
investments for these programs might be relatively low compared
to programs geared toward children who live close to their school.

5.2. Parental fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime

With 70 to 90 percent of funding earmarked for engineering
components, SRTS programs are best suited for building a safe
pedestrian and bicycle environment for children. SRTS programs
are needed most in areas where actual traf<U+FB01>c dangers exist and
children live close enough to school to be able to walk or bike.
One study that only included students who lived within 2 mile of
their school highlighted many of the signi<U+FB01>cant positive associations 
between pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure and ATS
(Kweon et al., 2007). SRTS projects, especially those that involve
an engineering component, should be prioritized for funding in
areas with objectively documented traf<U+FB01>c dangers. SRTS administrators 
need to objectively compare the safety of school environments 
across project applicants. Numerous methods and tools
exist for evaluating the pedestrian and bicycle safety near schools
and along school walk routes (Medina et al., 2010; National
Center for Safe Routes to School (NCSRTS), 2010b). These tools
should be used to inform the design of programs. Geo-referenced
multi-year collisions, traf<U+FB01>c volume, and signalization data could
supplement detailed site audits and allow for a coarse yet

objective comparison of the safety environment across numerous
schools.
SRTS programs must also identify and address parental fears of
traf<U+FB01>c that may not register through collision data or walk audits.
The NCSRTS parent survey contains information to gauge and
compare parental safety concern across programs. In areas with
high levels of parent concerns about traf<U+FB01>c danger but low levels
of objective traf<U+FB01>c danger, increase rates of ATS may be achieved
through relatively low-cost education and encouragement activities. 
The NCSRTS parent survey is also a useful tool to identify
areas with high levels of concern about crime. SRTS programs in
these areas may wish to partner with police or neighborhood
watch organizations to address public safety concerns during
school commutes. For younger children, the walking school bus, a
system where one or more parent volunteer chaperones a group
of children along the walk to or from school, appears to be a
particularly effective activity for alleviating parent safety concerns 
of both traf<U+FB01>c and crime (Kearns et al., 2003). For older
children, systems that would require a child’s school to alert his
or her parent if the child failed to arrive could be effective at
alleviating parental fears of abduction (Ahlport et al., 2008). The
parent ultimately makes the commute mode choice and must be
convinced that his or her child will be safe during the trip to and
from school.

5.3. Schedule constraints

Because schedules are likely to vary considerably from family
to family and from day to day, SRTS programs should seek to
identify the range of schedule con<U+FB02>icts that exist within a schoolbased 
community and develop activities accordingly. The NCSRTS
parent survey contains information to identify the extent to
which schedule con<U+FB02>icts act as a barrier to walking or biking to
school. Better yet, SRTS planning that involves parent stakeholders 
would provide a more in-depth understanding of the
scheduling nuances that may prevent children from walking and
biking to school. Such details could inform solutions that reduce
the parental time requirements for ATS (e.g., a walking
school bus) or incorporate <U+FB02>exibility into the school commute
(e.g., before- and after-school daycare). Furthermore it may be
bene<U+FB01>cial for SRTS programs to encourage collaboration with
local employers to encourage active commuting for all family
members, not just children.

5.4. Values

Fears of the dangers of walking or biking deter parents from
allowing their children to use these modes of travel to school. In
contrast, the positive aspects of walking and biking – health
bene<U+FB01>ts, social interactions, reduced carbon footprints – can
attract parents to these modes. Strong parental support for an
SRTS program could be a good indicator of attitudes that support
ATS. Parental values can be identi<U+FB01>ed through the NCSRTS parent
survey; and a SRTS planning process that involves parent input is
yet one more technique for ensuring that an SRTS program is
designed to address parental values.
It is also important to remember that the student is ultimately
the one travelling to school. Students who rode their bikes to
school did so because it was enjoyable and provided a <U+FB01>tness
challenge (Orsini and O’Brien, 2006). Some parents drove their
children to school because it was their child’s preference
(McDonald and Aalborg, 2009). Even though the parent decides
how the child travels to school (Faulkner et al., 2010), SRTS efforts
should also seek to understand children’s transportation attitudes
and address negative perceptions of walking and cycling to
school. Some SRTS programs have developed student surveys
that capture these perceptions (Kauffman et al., 2010).

5.5. Weather

Children who normally walk to school may be driven to school
when the weather is bad, and children who are normally driven
may walk when the weather is nice, but data indicate that rates of
ATS change little under different weather conditions (National
Center for Safe Routes to School (NCSRTS), 2010c). School-based
programs to support walking and bicycling should at least ensure
that the proper storage facilities exist for jackets, umbrellas, and
other weather gear to make walking in inclement weather more
comfortable.

5.6. School characteristics

Because distance has such a strong effect on ATS, school
districts should use neighborhood school attendance boundaries
to site new schools or retain existing schools within family
residential neighborhoods. These policies would ensure that the
greatest number of children lived within walking distance to their
school. Policies intended to keep children safe during the school
commute, such as grade/age minimums for walking or biking to
school or rules against riding push scooters to school, can undermine 
efforts for families to use ATS. Any SRTS program should
begin with a review of school policies to ensure that walking and
biking to school is supported by school policies. Although a school
that was part of an SRTS grant application should logically not
have policies in place that restrict walking and biking to school,
SRTS coordinators should double check that this is the case before
awarding grants. SRTS applications should also include an audit of
the school environment to identify any physical elements that
contribute to a dangerous or inconvenient walking or biking
environment. An audit should include everything from the
drop-off/pick-up zone to classroom coat racks. Since every child
that uses ATS will have to arrive or depart school, the school
environment can have a large potential impact on children’s use
of ATS. Care should be taken to ensure that efforts to improve the
safety of the school environment does not make driving more
convenient at the expense of walk and bike safety.

5.7. Resources

Children at schools in areas of greater deprivation often are
more likely to have no other options but to use ATS due to lack of
school bussing and to family <U+FB01>nancial resources that may be
insuf<U+FB01>cient to cover the cost of driving to school. These school
communities could bene<U+FB01>t directly from SRTS engineering, education, 
and enforcement activities to increase the safety of
children who have no choice but to walk to school. Making ATS
a safe and attractive option in low-socioeconomic status neighborhoods 
could have the added bene<U+FB01>t of freeing up resources
that families currently spend on driving children to school. The
resource barrier is important to consider in SRTS proposal selection 
protocols because schools in lower-income areas not only
encounter greater institutional barriers to accessing SRTS funding
(National Safe Routes to School Task Force, 2008), but also are
often exposed to greater crime and traf<U+FB01>c dangers (Zhu and Lee,
2008). An option for addressing this barrier is making SRTS
planning assistance and program guidance available to schools
in such neighborhoods. SRTS proposals could also be prioritized
for funding using school-based measures of deprivation, such as
the percent of students on the free or reduced lunch program, or
census-based deprivation measures, such as average family
income or car ownership-to-adult ratios near the school.

At the same time, higher-income neighborhoods should not be
neglected during SRTS funding allocations. These areas may be
capable of generating a substantial mode switch from the family
auto to active transportation. SRTS programs in wealthier neighborhoods 
must be designed to overcome the greater prevalence of
transportation options and resources available to families. These
areas would likely bene<U+FB01>t from SRTS programs that focused on
encouragement.

5.8. Culture

Country of birth, and racial/ethnic, as well as regional differences 
in walking to school appear to be a re<U+FB02>ection of related
environmental and socioeconomic factors. Cultural dynamics at a
school, however, can in<U+FB02>uence the success of programs that
support ATS and should be considered by SRTS program planners
(Johnston et al., 2006).

6. Limitations

This article synthesized a large amount of quantitative and
qualitative research on ATS into eight factors that in<U+FB02>uence a
child’s use of ATS. The list, however, is subject to limitations. First,
it is based on evidence from qualitative and cross-sectional
research. While paths of in<U+FB02>uences are suggested based on
qualitative research <U+FB01>ndings, they should not be generalized
indiscriminately. Second, the tallies of signi<U+FB01>cant and not
signi<U+FB01>cant <U+FB01>ndings shown in Table 1 are intended to serve as a
rough estimate of the importance of each correlate group in
in<U+FB02>uencing the decision to walk or bike to school. Further
consideration of these <U+FB01>ndings should take into account the
speci<U+FB01>c characteristics of the individual studies’ designs and the
relative strength of the associations in the analyses. Third, school
characteristics and weather have only a small number of variables
contributing to the evidence base. SRTS practitioners would
bene<U+FB01>t from further research into the effect of these factors on
the school commute decision. Finally, the eight factors are
intended to guide state-level management of the SRTS program
across the U.S., but should not replace detailed, site-speci<U+FB01>c
assessments of the unique barriers and facilitators to walking
and biking to school that exist within individual school-based
communities. Further research, including case/control, longitudinal 
and/or qualitative research designs should be carried out to
determine the extent to which changing the common barriers/
facilitators in<U+FB02>uences the actual use of ATS.

7. Conclusion

Nationwide, state DOTs received requests for SRTS funding
that totaled about three times the amount allocated to the
program. Unless more funding is made available, state SRTS
administrators must prioritize funding for proposals with the
greatest potential to increase the safety and numbers of children
walking or biking to school. Programs with the greatest potential
for success would be located in areas with few barriers and many
facilitators to walking and biking to school, or would be designed
to overcome any barriers that did exist and establish facilitators.
This study reviewed qualitative and quantitative research to
identify these barriers and facilitators in the form of common
factors that in<U+FB02>uence a parent’s decision on whether a child walks
or is driven to school. Eight factors were identi<U+FB01>ed: distance to
school, fear of traf<U+FB01>c and crime, schedule constraints, values,
resources, culture, weather, and school characteristics. The SRTS
program review process should take these factors into consideration 
as applications are prioritized for funding.