Findings from Research on Active Transportation to School and Implications for Safe Routes to School Programs                                                                          
abstract
This literature review identified common factors associated with active transportation to school (ATS). It used a conceptual
framework of a child’s commute mode to school to classify 480 variables from forty-two studies that were tested for association
with ATS. Four factors most frequently influenced ATS: distance, income, traffic and crime fears, and parental attitudes and schedules.
Regular ATS results in more physical activity but research is lacking on other outcomes. Safe Routes to School, a program
designed to increase rates and safety of ATS, can use an understanding of these influences and outcomes to more effectively allocate 
its limited resources.

Introduction                                                        
									
This literature review identified factors that were commonly								
associated with walking, biking, and other forms of active		
transportation to school (ATS). It summarized findings from		
research that examined correlates of walking and biking to								
school. Findings were reviewed within a conceptual framework        
of a child’s commute mode to school to understand hypothesized 
paths of influence. The results provide a broad understanding 
of the factors that influence and result from ATS.									
ATS is believed to be a convenient way for children to									
obtain regular physical activity, explore their local environments, 
and reduce their environmental impact. Regular									
physical activity helps prevent chronic diseases of inactivity,									
such as obesity and diabetes (CDC 2008b). Interaction with          
the outdoor environment is believed to contribute to social									
skills, independence, and self-sufficiency as children develop										
(National Safe Routes to School Task Force 2008). And to the									
extent that walk and bike trips replace automobile trips to									
school, ATS mitigates air, noise, and other forms of pollution										
(Environmental Protection Agency [EPA] 2003). Despite these											
potential personal and societal benefits, rates of ATS in the										
United States have declined—from 40.7 percent in 1969 to            
12.9 percent in 2001—as rates of students being driven to										
school in the family car have increased (McDonald 2007a). It
was recently estimated that 20 to 30 percent of local morning
traffic during the school year is a result of parents driving their
children to school (Hubsmith 2006).                                  
Safe Routes to School (SRTS) programs aim to reverse
Corresponding Author:
these trends. The primary objectives of SRTS is to increase the     
rate and safety of ATS through both infrastructure improvements 
and non-infrastructure activities. The national SRTS          

program has received an overwhelming response since it began
in 2005. State Department of Transportations (DOTs) that
administer the program have received more than 8,000 applications 
for projects totaling more than $1.3 billion. The program
has only been able to fund about a third of these (NCSRTS
2009). Because demand far outstrips available SRTS funding,
methods are necessary for allocating limited resources to projects 
that most efficiently address barriers to safe 
walking andbiking to school.
The first step toward addressing barriers to ATS is to identify 
the barriers themselves. This review article is intended to
help identify common barriers to ATS, which can help inform
the design of SRTS projects, the selection of SRTS applications 
with the greatest potential for success, the evaluation
of SRTS projects, and additional planning activities or policies 
that support ATS. An understanding of ATS outcomes
can contribute to an accurate estimate of the benefits of the
SRTS program.
Previous review articles have summarized literature on
children’s active transport to school (Davison, Werder, and
Lawson 2008; Sirard and Slater 2008), children’s active transport 
to school and health outcomes (Faulkner et al. 2009), and
children’s active transport to any destination (Pont et al. 2009).
This article contributes to the literature by framing the findings

from research on active transport to school in terms of
implications for SRTS and planning practitioners.

SRTS Background

Originally developed in Denmark during the 1970s in response
to unsafe pedestrian and bicyclist environments for children,
SRTS programs soon spread internationally. The first U.S. programs 
appeared in 1997 in Florida and New York. After numerous 
grassroots, state-funded, and pilot SRTS programs, the
2005 federal transportation bill, Safe Accountable Flexible
Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users
(SAFETEA-LU), established a national SRTS program within
the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The FHWA
allocates money to State DOTs, which in turn award grant
money to local agencies for SRTS projects (NCSRTS 2006).
SAFETEA-LU also established a National Center for Safe
Routes to School (NCSRTS) to act as a clearinghouse for SRTS
program resources.
SRTS programs support children walking or biking safely
to and from school through some combination of the five Es:
Engineering (e.g., pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure
improvements); Education (e.g., pedestrian and bicyclist
safety courses); Enforcement (e.g., increased police patrols
near schools); Encouragement (e.g., special events or media
campaigns); and Evaluation (e.g., data collection and analysis). 
SAFETEA-LU stipulates that each state spend 70 to 90
percent of its federal SRTS funding on infrastructure development 
and the remainder on non-infrastructure activities
(NCSRTS 2006).
SAFETEA-LU allocated $612 million to the federal SRTS
program and, as of December 31, 2009, State DOTs have
announced $427 million in awards for SRTS projects.
Demand for these projects has outpaced funding. The awarded
$427 million represents less than a third of the $1.3 billion in
SRTS funding requested through grant applications (NCSRTS
2009). Some states and regional agencies provide additional
funding for their SRTS programs and SRTS stakeholders are
lobbying to expand the program with the passage of the next
transportation bill (Safe Routes to School National Partnership 2009).

SRTS Evaluations

Evaluations of SRTS programs are limited. This may be in
part to the newness of the program and the few completed projects 
due to the lag time required for money to flow from the
FHWA to grant recipients. Additionally, SAFETEA-LU did
not mandate data collection nor evaluations of the SRTS program 
(National Safe Routes to School Task Force 2008). The
NCSRTS does act as a data clearinghouse for programs that
choose to collect data and is developing a national program
evaluation plan. To date the published body of SRTS evaluations 
consists of legacy SRTS programs—those that were
established before the FHWA SRTS program.

Rates of ATS. Three evaluations of SRTS projects in
California examined pre- and post-project rates of walking and
biking to school (Boarnet et al. 2005; Orenstein et al. 2007;
Staunton, Hubsmith, and Kallins 2003). In a convenience sample 
of ten elementary schools that implemented a SRTS project,
rates of walking and bicycling reported through a parent survey
declined after SRTS projects were implemented; however,
rates increased for students who passed a sidewalk or traffic
signal improvement on the way to or from school (Boarnet
et al. 2005). In an evaluation of 125 SRTS schools, only a small
number of schools reported pre- and post-project rates of walking 
and biking. Rates varied greatly from school to school and
depending on the data collection method. Direct observations
yielded increases from 20 to 200 percent while increases
reported through parent surveys were in the range of 10 percent
(Orenstein et al. 2007). In Marin County, public schools that
took part in a SRTS program were surveyed during the
2000–2001 and 2001–2002 school years. Six schools were surveyed 
in 2000–2001 and seven in 2001–2002. From fall 2000
to spring 2002, researchers observed a 64 percent increase in
the number of children walking, a 114 percent increase in the
number of students biking, a 91 percent increase in the number
of students carpooling, and a 39 percent decrease in the number
of children arriving by private car carrying only one student
(Staunton, Hubsmith, and Kallins 2003). The validity of these
figures is questionable because only two schools participated in
surveys in both school years. In all three evaluations, none of
the changes in rates of ATS could be directly attributed to the
effects of SRTS programs because they were not compared to
changes in rates at control schools. Evaluations using more rigorous 
experimental designs are necessary to assess the effect of
SRTS programs on ATS.
The walking school bus (WSB)—sometimes a component
of SRTS programs—consists of an adult chaperone that walks
with children along a specified route to or from school, picking
up or dropping off children along the way. The adult monitors
children, providing regular encouragement of proper pedestrian
skills (Johnston et al. 2006). In Seattle, a WSB program
resulted in a 25 percent increase in children walking to school
(Johnston 2008). in Auckland, New Zealand, children who participated 
in a WSB program walked to or from school an average
of 6.7 trips per week, resulting in an estimated 19.5 fewer cars
outside the school at the start or end of each school day (Kearns,
Collins, and Neuwelt 2003). In Hertfordshire, England, 22
schools with a total of 26 WSBs reported an average of ten children 
per route, 62 percent of whom previously traveled to or
from school by car (Mackett et al. 2005).

Safety. In a California SRTS evaluation, the overall annual
rate of collisions that resulted in injury or death of child pedestrians 
or bicyclists within a quarter mile of SRTS schools declined
by 13 percent from pre-project to post-project periods (Orenstein
et al. 2007). Control areas also experienced a similar decline in
pedestrian and bicyclist collisions. These findings show that
SRTS programs are at least benign in terms of crash involvement—they 
do not result in increased collisions. A similar

conclusion was reached in a study that examined rates of child
pedestrian and bicycle collision in three states (Blomberg
et al. 2008). The authors of the California evaluation went on
to conclude that SRTS areas would have seen a net increase in
exposure-based pedestrian and bicyclist safety based on limited
evidence that the number of children walking and biking to
school increased at SRTS schools (Orenstein et al. 2007). They
estimated that safety benefits ranged from no net change to a
49 percent decrease in the collision rate among child pedestrians
and a 100 percent decrease for child bicyclists. They calculated
that the cost for each collision prevented by a SRTS project ranged 
from $40,397 to $282,779, depending on the assumed
increase in ATS. These costs were greater than other road safety
improvement programs, but did not account for other potential
benefits of the SRTS program, such as decreased traffic congestion 
and air quality near schools, increased safety for adult
pedestrians in the vicinity, and increases in physical activity
among students.
Dumbaugh and Frank (2007) reviewed the results of empirical
safety evaluations of ten pedestrian countermeasures commonly
included in SRTS projects. They found that active police enforcement 
and physical traffic calming features, such as speed humps,
slow motorists to a degree that would reduce the frequency of
pedestrian–vehicle collisions. Sidewalks and raised medians
reduced the actual frequency of pedestrian–vehicle collisions
by effectively separating vehicular from pedestrian traffic. The
effectiveness of other common SRTS program elements was
largely assumed. Signalized crossings were found to result in
safer pedestrian–auto interactions, but unsignalized crosswalks
were found to result in more collisions. This corresponded with
research done at SRTS projects in California, where sidewalk and
traffic signal improvements were associated with improved
safety behaviors while crosswalk installation, crosswalk signal
improvements, and bicycle path improvements were not (Boarnet

et al. 2005). Dumbaugh and Frank (2007) found that school zone
flashing lights were found to reduce speeds only by about 5 mph,
with average travel speeds remaining above speed zone limits.
The safety effects of bicycle lanes were disputed. Motorist education 
programs resulted in little or no behavior change. Child
pedestrian education programs were only shown to increase
safety knowledge in pencil-and-paper tests. But a Miami-Dade
County, Florida elementary school-based pedestrian safety program 
was found to increase pedestrian safety knowledge in
paper-and-pencil tests and positive pedestrian crossing behaviors,
even three months after the program (Hotz et al. 2004). Finally,
no studies were found on the safety effects of crossing guards.
Research examined in Dumbaugh and Frank’s (2007) evaluation,
however, did not specifically measure the potential combined
influence of these measures or the effect of these measures on
children. Due to developmental limitations, children up to age
nine are at ‘‘considerable risk’’ of traffic danger (AmpofoBoateng 
and Thomson 1991) and the maximum vehicular confrontation 
speed for children aged six and younger is estimated
at 10 mph (Vahl and Giskes 1990). For these reasons, considerable 
safety measures may be necessary to ensure the safety of
young children walking and biking to school.

Qualitative outcomes. Agencies involved in California SRTS
projects generally felt that the program had succeeded in
improving safety for schoolchildren and for other neighborhood 
residents (Orenstein et al. 2007). The majority of parents
at SRTS schools noticed the construction project, thought it
would increase safety, and thought it was important (Boarnet
et al. 2005). The inner-city Seattle WSB program was attributed 
with helping to forge a functioning parent–teacher association 
at a school that had been divided across multiple ethnic,
cultural, and linguistic lines (Johnston 2008). This suggests that
walking to school with neighbor children can promote a sense
of community and trust among families. Parents involved in the
Auckland WSB programs cited personal benefits in the amount
of time saved, the removal of the hassle of driving and finding a
parking space, and knowing that children were safe. Parents
saw their children benefiting from the healthy aspects of exercise, 
mixing with other children, and the independence of walking 
(Kearns, Collins, and Neuwelt 2003). WSBs do not always
result in positive outcomes. Some parental participants
reported time loss and negative social outcomes (Mackett
et al. 2005). WSBs have also been criticized as a form of social
control, since they are dependent upon parental surveillance
and are subject to adult-imposed rules (Kearns, Collins, and
Neuwelt 2003). However, interviews with WSB participants
in Christchurch, New Zealand, indicated that in addition to
many social benefits, the program encouraged children’s independent 
mobility (Kingham and Ussher 2007). Unfortunately,
WSBs are difficult to maintain due to lack of volunteers, coordination 
difficulties, persistent fears of traffic safety, and insufficient 
ongoing support from schools (Kingham and Ussher
2005; Mackett et al. 2005).

Method
A literature review was conducted in the summer of 2008. The
majority of articles identified in this review were cited in a
recently published review of children’s ATS (Davison, Werder,
and Lawson 2008). Additional literature was identified through
searches of PubMed, ScienceDirect, the National Transportation
Library, and Active Living Research databases using relevant
keywords. Included in this review were articles and reports published 
after 2000 that presented findings from correlational
research on children’s ATS. Children were defined as aged eighteen 
and younger. Additional SRTS resources were obtained
through the NCSRTS and the Safe Routes to School National
Partnership, an organization of SRTS stakeholder groups.
In the literature reviewed, factors influencing the choice of
ATS came in the form of variables that were tested for a significant 
association with ATS. To assemble the evidence, each
variable was recorded along with three possible statistical associations 
with ATS: a positive significant association (p  .05),
a negative significant association (p  .05), or no significant
(p > .05) association. The measurement technique used was also
recorded for each variable. Any single article could contribute to
the evidence with multiple variables and only variables with a
reported association with the ATS were included.

Variables were first grouped into a conceptual framework of
a child’s commute mode to school based on McMillan’s (2005)
‘‘Conceptual Framework of an Elementary-Aged Child’s
Travel Behavior.’’ The conceptual framework included five
levels filtering the decision to select a specific mode of travel
and its outcome (figure 1). First were the characteristics of the
urban form at the home and the school locations, and between
the two. Second were mediating and moderating factors influencing 
the decision. Third and fourth were the parent’s decision
and the resulting mode of travel used by the child. And fifth
were the health and other outcomes of the travel mode choice.
McMillan’s conceptual framework suggested that urban form
characteristics, such as sidewalks, crosswalks, or other features
of the built environment, had an indirect effect on a child’s
mode of transportation to or from school. Instead, given certain
urban from characteristics, a parent developed opinions about
the ability of the built environment to support different modes
of travel for their child. These opinions were called mediating
factors because they acted as intervening causal variables, or

mediators, on a child’s travel behavior. Mediating factors
included other factors that were hypothesized to have a direct
effect on a child’s transportation options, such as the availability 
of a car or bike. These mediating factors were moderated—either 
intensified or diminished—by cultural norms,
attitudes, and other factors external to the immediate environment
and the trip to school. These were called moderating factors. The
interaction of mediating and moderating factors shaped the parent’s 
decision of how a child travels to or from school.
Hypothesized outcomes of children walking or biking to or
from school included physical health improvements, air quality
improvements, and traffic congestion relief near schools during
peak commute times (National Safe Routes to School Task
Journal of Planning Literature 26(2)
Force 2008). This conceptual framework served as an outline
for examining the results of all the variables that had been
tested for correlation with ATS.
The conceptual framework was originally developed for
elementary-aged students. As such, it might be less accurate for
younger children, who likely had fewer transportation options
due to developmental limitations, and older children, who
might have more to say about their mode of travel. Some
research suggested that a child’s travel mode on the trip to
school was more of the result of a negotiation between child
and parent than that of a purely parental decision (Valentine
1997). McMillan (2005) contended that the ultimate decision
was likely to be made by the parent.
The framework identified paths of influence. Paths were
helpful for understanding possible relationships between different 
variables and ATS. However, since the vast majority
of research on the subject was cross sectional—only two studies 
tested change in body mass index (BMI) over time (Heelan
et al. 2005; Rosenberg et al. 2006)—paths of influence could
not be confirmed. Finally, this framework did not include paths
of feedback. It was suggested that travel mode to school, parental

concerns of traffic danger, and concerns about the risks of criminal 
danger were interrelated (Carver, Timperio, and Crawford
2008). Parents who drove their children to school might be
attempting to protect them from traffic danger, to which they
in turn were contributing. Increased traffic danger might lead
to fewer people cycling, walking, or generally out and about
in a neighborhood. This might then lead to less familiarity with
neighbors and increased fear of danger from strangers. As a
result, other parents might fear that their child would become
a victim of crime and feel it was necessary to drive them to
school, thus further increasing traffic volume and, once again,
contributing to traffic safety fears. The conceptual framework
did not capture such complex interrelationships.
The variables associated with ATS were grouped in four of
the conceptual framework categories: urban form, mediating
and moderating factors, and outcomes. The noted limitations
of the conceptual framework were addressed by in-depth discussions 
of the variables grouped within each category. For discussion, 
variables with similar characteristics were further
grouped into subcategories.

Findings and the Implications for SRTS
Programs

The literature review identified forty-two articles and government 
reports that presented findings from correlational
research on ATS (table 1).
A direct comparison of results was prohibited due to various 
measurements and methodologies. Most studies used
children as the unit of analysis, although one used schools
(Sirard, Ainsworth et al. 2005). Geographic scope ranged from
nationwide to school-specific. Data were obtained from a variety
of sources including parent and child surveys, transportation
diaries, physical activity recall questionnaires, census and other
government-supplied data, geographic information system (GIS)

data, accelerometer data, and direct observations. Many studies
used random sampling techniques or a convenience sample; others
used purposeful sampling techniques to compare, for example, 
students in urban and suburban areas (Sirard, Ainsworth
et al. 2005; Schlossberg et al. 2006). 
The majority of studies included all children that attended a 
school or a set of schools or all trips to school from a set of
travel diaries. A few limited their analyses to children that

could readily use ATS because they lived either within a school
walk zone (Kweon et al. 2007), a distance considered walkable
(Martin, Lee, and Lowry 2007), or an empirically defined maximum 
walking and biking distance (Yarlagadda and Srinivasan
2008).
ATS was defined in various ways. Some research simply
used the child’s usual mode of transportation (Bricker et al.
2002), while other studies defined ATS as walking or biking

to school at least once a week (Evenson et al. 2006). Martin,
Lee, and Lowry (2007) found that in a nationally representative
sample of children aged nine to fifteen who lived within a mile
of school, almost three-quarters of children who walked or
biked to school at least once in a week did so all five school
days. The variables they found to be significantly associated
with ATS changed very little when they changed their definition 
of ATS from walking or biking at least one day a week
to all five days.
From the 42 articles, 480 variables tested for correlation
with ATS were identified. Variables were classified into all
four categories of the conceptual framework; 38 subcategories 
of variables that measured similar characteristics were
identified.

Urban Form Factors

Urban form factors were features of the physical environment
in which a child’s commute to school occurred. The conceptual
framework suggested that urban form indirectly affected a
child’s school commute mode by shaping parents’ opinions
about the ability of the built environment to support various
transportation options.
Measures of urban form variables were both objective (GIS
data or direct observations) and subjective (parent or child
surveys). For discussion, urban form variables have been classified 
into the following eight subcategories: distance to
school, non-motorized infrastructure, route barriers, network
connectivity, land use mix, density, walkability, and urbanization 
(table 2).
Distance from a child’s home to school was the clearest correlate 
of ATS. Of the twenty-two times distance to school was
examined, the only time a significant negative relationship was
not found was when children living between one half and
one mile to school were compared with children living within
1–2 miles from school (McDonald 2008b).
The strong influence of distance on ATS illustrates the conceptual 
model. Distance from a child’s home to school is a feature 
of the built environment directly related to travel time to
school—a mediating factor that directly influences mode
choice. In a nationwide U.S. study, a 1-minute increase in the
time it takes to walk to school led to a 0.2 percent decrease
in the likelihood of a child walking to school (McDonald
2008a). The relationship between distance to school and the
probability of ATS was linear for trips less than a mile but
dropped to a constant low rate for trips greater than 1 mile
(McDonald 2008a). These thresholds differed slightly from
those found in Ireland, where a 1-mile increase in a child’s distance 
from school was found to decrease the probability of
active commuting by 71 percent and the majority of walkers
lived within 1½ miles of school and the majority of cyclists
lived within 2½ miles (Nelson et al. 2008).
In a study using San Francisco Bay Area travel diaries, six
miles was found to be the maximum distance a child would
walk or bike to or from school (Yarlagadda and Srinivasan
2008). In the same study, distance was found to have a greater

impact on travel to school than travel from school, which
suggested that pressure to arrive at school on time might result
in greater sensitivity to distance.
Distance was a strong correlate of, but not a sufficient factor
determining, ATS. In the United States, only 47 percent of the
decline in the rate of ATS between 1969 and 2001 was explained
by greater distances from homes to school (McDonald 2007a).
And nationally, of children who lived within a mile of school,
only 47.9 percent walked or biked to school (Martin, Lee,
and Lowry 2007).
The presence of various non-motorized transportation
infrastructure features—mostly sidewalks—was found to be
positively associated with ATS in about half the studies they
were tested. Five of the twelve significant associations were
found in a study that only included students who lived within
2 miles of their school (Kweon et al. 2007), which suggested
that non-motorized transportation infrastructure was more
effective at distances that could readily be walked or biked.
But other literature suggested that urban form played a
greater role in influencing trips at the margin of what was
considered walkable, while mediating and moderating factors 
had a greater influence on trips that could easily be
walked (McDonald 2007b).
Three studies examined the specific route a child would
travel on the way to school from his or her house (BringolfIsler 
et al. 2008; Timperio et al. 2006; Schlossberg et al.
2006). Major road crossings were twice found to have a negative 
association with ATS (Bringolf-Isler et al. 2008; Timperio
et al. 2006) and steep slopes were negatively associated with
ATS for young children, aged five and six (Timperio et al.
2006). Timperio et al. (2006) also found direct routes to school
were negatively associated with ATS. The authors speculated
this was because more direct streets carried a heavier volume
of traffic, which would inhibit walking and biking.
Neighborhood characteristics including street network connectivity 
(Kweon et al. 2007; Schlossberg et al. 2006; Mota
et al. 2007; Kerr et al. 2006), mix of land uses (Martin, Lee, and
Lowry 2007; Saksvig et al. 2007; Kerr et al. 2006; Kweon et al.
2007; McMillan 2007; McDonald 2007b), and population density 
(Nelson et al. 2008; McDonald 2007b, 2008a, 2008b; Kerr
et al. 2006; Kweon et al. 2007) were associated with greater
ATS. The density and street connectivity trends make intuitive
sense. Neighborhoods with dense populations and wellconnected 
street networks are likely to have a larger portion
of children who live within easy walking or biking distances
of schools and routes to school that carry less traffic. The significance 
of mixed land use is more difficult to interpret. It is
often associated with walking for transportation in the general
population due to the close proximity of potential destinations
(Saelens and Handy 2008). For ATS, however, school and
home are the only destinations necessary. The influence of
mixed land use on ATS may be due to children and parents who
are accustomed to walking to other neighborhood destinations
and are therefore comfortable with walking or biking to school.
The links between these neighborhood urban form characteristics 
and active transport to school was reinforced by the

finding that a ‘‘walkability’’ index—an aggregate measure of
residential density, retail floor area ratio, intersection density,
and land use mix—was positively associated with ATS (Kerr
et al. 2006). Walkability measured through a parent survey was

also associated with ATS (Yang et al. 2008). It came as no
surprise that areas of greater urbanization, where these
walking-supportive urban form characteristics were commonly
found, were often associated with greater rates of ATS (Fulton

et al. 2005; Martin, Lee, and Lowry 2007; McDonald 2007a;
Pabayo and Gauvin 2008; Schofield, Schofield, and Mummery
2005). The single study that found a significant negative association 
between urbanization and ATS was carried out in the
Philippines; the finding was attributed to lower socioeconomic
status, and therefore fewer transportation options, of rural
Filipinos (Tudor-Locke et al. 2003).

Discussion. Distance was the most consistent correlate of
ATS, and children were more likely to walk or bike to school
in dense, urban, mixed use, and highly connected neighborhoods. 
Many of these neighborhoods may already have complete 
and safe pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure and high
rates of walking and biking to school. These places would
benefit little from a SRTS project. But dense, urban, mixed
use, and highly connected neighborhoods without complete
pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure and low rates of walking
to school would be highly effective locations for a SRTS project.
In areas such as these, strategically placed infrastructure
improvements could fill missing gaps in otherwise robust pedestrian 
or bicycle transportation networks and low-cost noninfrastructure 
activities to encourage walking and biking would
reach the greatest number of children that could potentially walk
or bike safely to school. Additionally, SRTS infrastructure
improvements in urban areas would affect the greatest percentage 
of the general population (Watson and Dannenberg 2008).
Schools in nonurban areas that tend to lack the built environment 
features that support walking and biking may have a
great need for SRTS infrastructure improvements. But
because distance is such a strong influence on walking and
biking, they will get little use unless there is a substantial
child population near the school. Additionally, most SRTS
project budgets can only afford to make minor improvements
to the pedestrian and bicycle environment, not systematic
overhauls to an entire neighborhood’s street network. Smart
growth strategies to maintain existing neighborhood schools
and contain residential development within these already
built-up neighborhoods could be effective at supporting ATS
in the long term. These strategies could maintain, and eventually 
increase, the population of children that could safely walk
or bike to an existing school.
Sidewalks and traffic signal improvements were found to
result in increased ATS and safer pedestrian–auto interactions
(Boarnet et al. 2005). These features were also frequently found
to be associated with ATS in the correlational research
reviewed. SRTS planners should focus on these engineering
improvements but not at the neglect of a detailed assessment
to identify the unique pedestrian infrastructure needs of a specific community.

Mediating Factors

Mediating factors had a direct influence on a parent’s choice of
their child’s travel mode to or from school. Mediating factors
included direct effects of the social and natural environments—such 
as crime rates, traffic collision rates, or the

weather—and the way in which parents and children
interpreted their environment—such as perceived risks of
crime or traffic. Also included in this category were factors that
had a direct effect on a child’s transportation options, such as
the availability of a car or extracurricular activities that might
require additional travel. Mediating variables were classified
into the nine following subcategories: general safety, traffic,
crime, neighborhood characteristics, school characteristics,
transportation options, schedule constraints, and weather. Six
additional variables were categorized as miscellaneous mediating 
factors (table 3).
In the correlational research reviewed, safety concerns were
only sometimes found to have a significant negative association 
with ATS. Concerns for general safety and traffic safety
were more often associated with actual walking and biking than
concerns about crime.
In almost half the studies that tested household access to
automobiles, a significant negative relationship with ATS was
found. Schedule constraints that limited transportation options,
such as after school activities or full-time employment, were
also occasionally associated with less ATS. This might be due
to parents who found it convenient to drive their children to
school on their way to other destinations or did not have the
extra time needed to accompany their children on the walk to
or from school.
School characteristics that impact transportation also
appeared to influence ATS. The most obvious example was
school policies that restricted ATS. Parents who reported a
school policy that acted as a barrier to walking or biking to
school were less likely to have children who did so (Martin and
Carlson 2005). Perceived parking problems at school were also
associated with ATS (Black, Collins, and Snell 2001). This
finding came from an urban sample of households where distances 
to school were generally short. In these areas, the added
time necessary to find a parking space when driving a child to
school may make non-motorized modes more appealing. Children 
at public schools were more likely to walk or bike than
students at private (diGuiseppi et al. 1998; Merom et al.
2006) or alternative schools (Yang et al. 2008). Because private
schools typically draw students from a larger area, distances
from residences to private schools are likely too far to walk for
most students.
Just as children living in more walkable neighborhoods were
more likely to use ATS, children and parents who reported
what could be considered ‘‘nicer’’ neighborhood characteristics
were found to be more likely to walk or bike to school. Perhaps,
the most comprehensive measurement of a ‘‘nice’’ neighborhood 
used in these studies was social control and cohesion as
reported in the 2003 California Health Interview Survey. In this
survey, respondents were asked how strongly they agreed or
disagreed with statements such as ‘‘people in my neighborhood 
are willing to help one another,’’ ‘‘people in this neighborhood 
generally do not get along with each other,’’
‘‘people in this neighborhood can be trusted,’’ and ‘‘most
people in this neighborhood know each other’’ (McDonald
2007b). These individual-level responses were transformed

to census tract-level aggregates. In a San Francisco Bay Area
study, social control and cohesion was the strongest social
environment correlate of ATS, with greater rates of social
control and cohesion associated with greater rates of ATS
(McDonald 2007b).

Discussion. Transportation options clearly influence ATS.
SRTS projects in areas with less car ownership should be prioritized 
because more children are likely to already walk or bike
to school in these places. Securing the safety of these children
that have few travel options other than walking should be a priority 
for SRTS programs. To encourage non-motorized trips to
school for households that do have an option, SRTS projects
should modify the school environment to ensure it supports
walking and biking and discourages children arriving in the
family car—removing any policies that discourage walking
to school and expanding bicycle parking at the expense of auto
parking, for example. District-wide policies such as courtesy
busing and school choice should also be reviewed from the perspective 
of encouraging ATS. SRTS programs should also consider 
the broader community surrounding a school. Community
building efforts that improve aesthetics, encourage social interactions, 
and promote outdoor activities in a neighborhood
could result in parents perceiving their neighborhood as one
that could support a walk or bike trip to school.
Because parents’ and children’s travel schedules are closely
linked (Yarlagadda and Srinivasan 2008), SRTS programs
could be more effective if they focus on transportation mode
shifts for the entire household, not simply children. Policies
aimed at reducing driving alone or increasing commute flexibility 
for parents, such as commute trip reduction (CTR) and
transportation demand management (TDM) programs, might
result in greater rates of walking and biking to school for children. 
Further research on household transportation patterns
could be useful for identifying broader policies that facilitate
active commuting for the entire household. In the meantime,
public participation processes could be carried out at the city,
school district, neighborhood, or school level to identify
programs that would complement SRTS programs by giving
parents the flexibility necessary to walk or bike with their children 
to school.

Safety concerns were only sometimes found to have a significant 
negative association with ATS. They were, however,
frequently reported. A 2004 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) survey found that 30.4 and 11.7 percent of
parents reported traffic and crime danger, respectively, as a
barrier to their child walking or biking to school (Martin and
Carlson 2005). Traffic safety concerns for child bicyclists and
pedestrians were not without good reason. Although child
pedestrian and bicyclist injury rates have declined, it was attributed 
to less exposure—fewer children walking and biking—not
increased safety (CDC 2007a). Bicycling and walking were the
two most dangerous commute modes to and from school when
analyzed on the basis of exposure (Transportation Research
Board [TRB] 2002). Crime concerns may be based more on
social norms than actual risk. No trend data exist on violent
139
crimes (homicide, rape, robbery, and simple and aggravated
assault) against young children; however, the rate of violent
crime against twelve- to nineteen-year-olds has declined (CDC
2008a). From 1973 to 2005 the rate of these crimes dropped
from about 80 to 44 cases per 100,000 children (U.S. Department 
of Justice 2006). Kidnapping makes up only 2 percent
of violent crimes against youth and only 4 percent of all kidnappings 
occur around schools (Finklehor and Ormrod 2000).
And children, like adults, are statistically much more at risk
of being harmed by people they know (Valentine 1997). An
English qualitative study revealed that parental concern of
‘‘stranger danger’’ was often based on media coverage of a single 
case of abduction and that letting a child travel alone is an
indicator of neglectful or irresponsible parenthood (O’Brien
et al. 2000).
It appeared that practical constraints like distance and transportation 
options were more likely to be related to walking and
biking to school than safety concerns. But this may be because
households with children that must walk or bike to school did
so despite a perception of unsafe conditions. These crosssectional 
studies cannot examine the direction of any relationship. 
It could be that households became more aware of potential
dangers of walking and biking to school when the child actually
did so. This might explain why parents who said their child
thought it was safe to play in their neighborhood were less likely
to have children that walked or biked to school (Fulton et al.
2005).
SRTS programs must address safety concerns—real or perceived.
The dangers for child pedestrians and bicyclists and
the tendency for parents to react to media reports of kidnappings 
means that SRTS programs must truly succeed at making 
a safe environment for child pedestrians and bicyclists if
they are to realize a mode shift toward active transportation.
Additional research that examines the relationship between
ATS and objectively measured crime rates, traffic volumes,
or pedestrian safety indicators could be useful in determining
to what extent SRTS projects should focus on real or perceived dangers.

Moderating Factors

Moderating factors encompassed all factors external to the
immediate travel mode decision. Moderating variables covered
a wide range of characteristics—from a child’s height to a parent’s 
employment status. For discussion, these variables were
classified into sixteen subcategories: age, gender, culture (foreign 
and regional), race/ethnicity, income, employment, education, 
socioeconomic status, household size (absolute, parents,
and siblings), child’s independence, attitude toward ATS, attitude 
toward physical activity, and attitudes toward driving.
Twelve additional variables could not be neatly grouped and
were classified as miscellaneous factors (table 4).
Findings from studies that examined age were mixed. Generally, 
those studies showing a negative correlation between
age and ATS included only older children, aged nine to eighteen 
(Pabayo and Gauvin 2008; Tudor-Locke et al. 2003;

Fulton et al. 2005; Evenson et al. 2003; Schofield, Schofield,
and Mummery 2005). Studies showing a positive relationship
focused primarily on younger children, aged five to fourteen
(Merom et al. 2006; McDonald 2008a; Bringolf-Isler et al.
2008; Timperio et al. 2006; Kweon et al. 2007; Martin, Lee,
and Lowry 2007). These results supported the suggestion that
children were more likely walk or bike to school up until they

received a driver’s license, at which point ATS began to
decline (McDonald 2007b). Other researchers speculated that
older youth lived further away from their schools than younger
students, with distance being an important barrier to ATS (Fulton 
et al. 2005). A study that distinguished between walking
with a parent and walking alone found that younger children
were more likely to walk with their mother, while older

children were more likely to walk alone (Yarlagadda and
Srinivasan 2008).
Girls were also found to be more likely to walk to school
when they were accompanied by their mothers (Yarlagadda
and Srinivasan 2008). In all other studies that found a significant 
relationship between gender and ATS, boys were more
likely to walk or bike to school than girls.
No clear results emerged from correlational research on race
and culture. Children in the Southern United States were less
likely to walk or bike to school, possibly because of environmental 
constraints such as hotter climates and sprawling development 
patterns rather than regional cultural norms (Martin,
Lee, and Lowry 2007). Two studies using separate, nationally
representative samples initially found significant differences in
rates of ATS by racial groups, but found no differences after
controlling for several individual and neighborhood covariates
such as distance to school, household income, and density
(McDonald 2008b; Martin, Lee, and Lowry 2007).
Fewer household resources appeared to be consistently
associated with greater ATS. Income, employment, education, 
socioeconomic status, and number of parents in a household 
were all found to be significantly negatively associated
with ATS.
Attitudes toward transportation seemed to be a factor influencing 
ATS. Parents who had walked to their primary school
were more likely to have children that walked or biked to
school (Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley 2004). This suggested that
current efforts to encourage children to walk to school could
have long-lasting effects. Yang et al. (2008) found that parents
sometimes considered the mode of transport their child would
use for the trip to and from school when they purchased a
home. Parents who intended for their children to walk or bike
to school when purchasing a home were found to be more
likely to have children that actually used these modes. A single
British study examined the relationship between parental attitudes 
regarding cars and the effects of driving and the prevalence 
of children walking and biking to school in urban areas
(Black, Collins, and Snell 2001). The authors found that higher
levels of individual responsibility for the environment and
lower levels of a car-centered lifestyle were correlated with
more walking. General environmental awareness had no significant 
association with walking and biking to school.
The relationship between attitudes toward physical activity
and ATS was less clear. Four studies found an association
between positive attitudes in children or parents toward physical 
activity and ATS (Ziviani, Scott, and Wadley 2004; Merom
et al. 2006; Evenson et al. 2003; Martin, Lee, and Lowry 2007).
Fulton et al. (2005) found parental perception that their child
was too overweight for physical activity was associated with
a greater likelihood of walking and biking to school. This suggested 
that ATS was a viable option for physical activity for
children who could not easily participate in recreational forms
of physical activity. Martin, Lee, and Lowry (2007) also found
that children who participated in organized physical activities

at least once a week were less likely to use ATS. This could
be due to the need to travel long distances to sports facilities

at specific times that could make walking or biking to school
unfeasible. Most physical activity variables tested, however,
were not significantly associated with ATS.
A single study found parents’ assessment of their child’s
level of independence was positively associated with ATS
(Merom et al. 2006). Four other studies, however, found no
association between various measures of children’s independence 
and ATS (Bringolf-Isler et al. 2008; Evenson et al.
2006; Fulton et al. 2005; Martin, Lee, and Lowry 2007).

Discussion. Results from research on variables that moderated 
the parent–child decision to use ATS could help identify
locations where more students would be likely to walk or bike
to school and, therefore, where SRTS infrastructure improvements, 
pedestrian and bicyclist safety education, and traffic
enforcement could benefit more potential child pedestrians and
bicyclists. Based on the findings related to the children’s age,
middle schools would have more potential walkers and bikers
than high and elementary schools. And based on findings from
research on income, employment, education, household size,
and neighborhood socioeconomic status, more disadvantaged
areas would likely have a higher portion of children using
active commute modes to school than their wealthier counterparts. 
The finding that children from lower-income households
or areas of greater disadvantage were more likely to walk or
bike to school was troubling considering that schools in more
impoverished areas were often surrounded by greater crime and
traffic dangers (Zhu and Lee 2008) and encountered greater
institutional barriers to accessing SRTS funding (National Safe
Routes to School Task Force 2008). SRTS administrators
should take steps to ensure that lower-income areas can access
the SRTS program.
Conversely, high income neighborhoods may be capable of
generating a greater mode switch from the family auto to active
transportation. Schools in wealthier neighborhoods could benefit 
from SRTS projects that focused on encouragement.
Findings that girls were less likely to walk or bike to school
than boys confirmed other research indicating that girls spent
less time in the public urban setting than boys, were more likely
to be supervised; and had a more restricted home range
(O’Brien et al. 2000, Valentine 1997). SRTS projects should
direct extra effort toward supporting ATS for girls.
The conceptual framework used in this analysis suggested
that the parent played a greater role than the child in deciding
the mode of travel to school and all research on attitudes toward
travel modes to school was based on parent surveys. SRTS
projects should focus efforts on addressing parental attitudes
toward active travel. SRTS practitioners could also benefit
from research on children’s attitudes toward commute modes
and how these attitudes are related to the actual travel mode.
Further research should explore this relationship.

ATS has been thought to result in numerous positive outcomes,
such as reduced congestion, less air pollution, better health, and

cognitive development (National Safe Routes to School Task
Force 2008). Physical health factors were the only variables
found to be tested in correlational research. Studies tested the
hypothesis that children who walked or bicycled to or from
school were more physically active and healthier than students
who were driven or drove. Outcome variables were organized
into four subcategories: physical activity, obesity, weight, and
fitness (table 5).
ATS was associated with more physical activity in children

and youth, especially those who regularly walked or biked to
school. Little evidence was found linking ATS with a lower
prevalence of obesity. A North Carolina survey found that ATS
was negatively correlated with BMI in sixth to eighth graders
but not in high school students (Evenson et al. 2003). Direct
obesity measurements using both BMI and skinfold tests of
fourth and fifth graders in Southern California found that boys
who walked or biked to school had a significantly lower BMI
than those who did not, but no significant relationship was
found for girls (Rosenberg et al. 2006). Several other studies
using objective measurements (Heelan et al. 2005; Sirard,
Riner et al. 2005; Tudor-Locke et al. 2003; Saksvig et al.
2007) and surveys (Fulton et al. 2005; Yeung, Wearing, and
Hills 2008) found no significant relationship between obesity
and ATS. However, surveys and other self-report methods for
measuring BMI can be inaccurate (Molaison et al. 2006).
Two studies measured the health effects of active commuting 
over a two-year period (Heelan et al. 2005; Rosenberg et al.
2006). Neither found a significant decrease in BMI among students 
who walked or biked to school. In fact, Heelan et al.
(2005) reported an increase in BMI among overweight children
that walked or biked to school.
One Danish study found that children that biked to school
were more physically fit than both walkers and students that
used inactive modes of travel (Cooper et al. 2006).

Discussion. Because higher levels of physical activity were
more commonly found in children who regularly walked and
biked to school (Sirard, Riner, et al. 2005; Fulton et al. 2005;
Saksvig et al. 2007), SRTS programs should focus on establishing 
stable, long-term walking or biking to school behaviors.
Encouragement activities that infrequently promote ATS, like
an annual walk to school day, may be less effective at increasing 
children’s health than activities designed to instill regular
walking and biking commute habits in children.
SRTS programs have the potential to increase children’s
physical activity but appear insufficient to address the childhood 
obesity epidemic alone. Physical activity expends calories 
but weight loss only occurs when calories expended
exceed calories consumed. Calorie intake was not included in
the studies reviewed. Children who walked or biked to school
may have been consuming more calories than they were burning. 
SRTS programs paired with nutrition education or policies
that encouraged healthy, reasonable diets for children could be
more effective at combating childhood obesity.

The studies on childhood health impacts identified in this literature 
review were limited to correlational research or

longitudinal studies that lasted only a few years. Physical activity 
behaviors were found to often track into adulthood (Kuh and
Cooper 1992) and transportation habits and attitudes during
childhood (Baslington 2008). This suggests that SRTS programs 
could have long-term benefits. Extended longitudinal
research could illuminate any long-term effects of walking or
biking to school.

Methodological Limitations and Missing

Evidence
The classification system used in this literature review proved to
be an effective tool for understanding the findings of a large
amount of correlational research and operationalizing the findings 
in order to guide and improve future SRTS programs and
projects. The framework had methodological limitations in that
it only focused on the significance of association between a single
variable and ATS. It did not account for strengths or weaknesses
of individual study design. Another literature review on children’s 
active transportation examined the methodological quality
of each publication (Pont et al. 2009). It included research on children’s 
active transportation to any location and found that increasing 
distance, income, and car ownership had convincing negative
associations with children’s active transportation while nonwhite 
ethnic background had a convincing positive association.
Evaluations of SRTS programs in place before the FHWAfunded 
SRTS program was implemented suggest that SRTS projects 
may result in increases in children walking and biking to
school, reductions in parents driving students to school, safer
travel behavior, no increase in child pedestrian or bicyclist collisions, 
and increased community cohesion. Evaluations of
FHWA-funded SRTS programs using robust experimental
designs, particularly control schools, are necessary to ensure that
the requirements of this program are delivering positive results.
Detailed evaluations could help isolate particularly effective
program elements, administrative procedures, or grant selection
criteria. To facilitate this research, detailed data on SRTS projects, 
student travel behaviors, and child pedestrian and bicycle
collisions are necessary. The NCSRTS, State DOTs, and local
SRTS programs can all play a part in gathering these data.
No correlational research was identified that examined the
effects of walking or biking to school on hypothesized outcomes 
other than physical health. The effects of greater rates
of ATS and lower rates of children arriving to school in family
vehicles have been estimated for air pollution, traffic congestion, 
and children’s respiratory health (National Safe Routes
to School Task Force 2008; EPA 2003). But no research was
identified that explored the direct relationship between ATS
and these outcomes or on children’s cognitive development.
Research on these topics would help accurately account for the
full range of potential impacts of SRTS projects.

Conclusion
This review revealed several factors that appear to commonly
influence a child’s commute mode to or from school. Shorter

distances from home to school, and therefore shorter travel
times for non-motorized transportation modes, were clearly
related to a greater likelihood of children walking or biking
to school. Children were also more likely to walk or bike to
school in neighborhoods that were densely populated, were
in an urban location, featured mixed land uses, and had a highly
connected street network. Findings from research that
examined car ownership, income, employment, education, the
number of parents in a household, and neighborhood socioeconomic 
status suggested that disadvantaged areas likely had a
higher portion of children using active commute modes to
school than their wealthier counterparts. This may reflect fewer
transportation options, and therefore greater use of walk and
bike modes for the school commute, for households with limited 
financial resources. Another resource that frequently had
the opposite relationship with ATS was time—households with
fewer schedule constraints and more time were more likely to
have children that walked or biked to school. Favorable attitudes 
toward active travel modes were also related to walking
and biking to school.
These factors associated with walking and biking to school
can be used by SRTS planners to identify areas where a SRTS
project would benefit a large number of children that would
walk or bike to school given the proper safety education,
encouragement, and infrastructure improvements. Conversely,
SRTS projects in areas that lack these characteristics—where
families live far from school, have ample resources, limited
time, and no interest in active commuting—would require a
substantial level of effort and resources to overcome these barriers. 
SRTS funding is limited and SRTS project budgets may
not be sufficient to address all these barriers. SRTS planners
should assess the extent to which these factors are present in
a school-based community and develop projects that address,
or at least acknowledge, them. Whatever various barriers or
facilitators of walking and biking to school are identified in a
given community, it is clear that all SRTS projects must
address the real and perceived dangers for child pedestrian and
bicyclists.
Based on findings from SRTS evaluations, SRTS projects
may result in more children walking and biking to school without 
increasing rates of collisions. Increases in ATS have been
shown to result in increases in physical activity for children.
Additional research is necessary to accurately assess these and
immediate results and any corollary benefits SRTS projects
may have on health, the environment, traffic congestion, and
physiological development. Additional SRTS evaluations are
also necessary to confirm the effectiveness of the program and
pinpoint project characteristics that are most effective in
accomplishing the program’s primary goals of supporting more
children walking and biking safely to and from school.