Predictors of driving among families living within 2 km from school:
Exploring the role of the built environment

Rates of active school travel have declined over time in line with decreasing levels of physical activity
among children. Understanding why some children are driven to school when walking is an option is
important for future intervention. The purpose of this study was to evaluate demographic characteristics,
parent/family level factors, attitudinal and psychosocial factors, route features, access to vehicles, and
environmental factors which appear to in<U+FB02>uence the decision to drive children who live within a
walkable distance from school in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area (GTHA), Canada. Computeraided 
telephone interviews were conducted in 2009 with 1001 parents of children attending elementary
school in the GTHA, Canada's largest urbanized region. Hierarchical logistic regression analyses were
conducted to examine the household demographics, parent/family factors, attitudinal and psychosocial
factors, route features, access to vehicles, and environmental factors (qualities of urban design) that
predict driving among households less than 2 km away from school (n ¼529). In the GTHA, attitudes and
psychosocial factors have a stronger role to play than the built environment in in<U+FB02>uencing driving
behavior within close proximity to school. The introduction of built environment characteristics in the
<U+FB01>nal regression model only explained an additional 4% of the variance in driving to school. To promote
AST among drivers living within a walkable distance from school, non-infrastructure programs that
provide adult supervision, such as Walking School Bus Schemes, may be a more powerful strategy to
alleviate safety concerns while potentially reducing the parental time costs of escorting the child, than
capital projects targeting changes to the built environment.

1. Background                                                                                
												
The trip to/from school can be an important source of physical                          
activity for children. Research consistently demonstrates an association                     
between walking and biking to school and higher levels of physical                           
activity (Faulkner et al., 2009), with active commuters accumulating a                       
greater volume of activity and more minutes of moderate-to-vigorous                          
physical activity in comparison to children who are driven to school.                            
The trip to and from school is therefore a means by which children can                       
accumulate daily physical activity necessary to the attainment of                            
current physical activity recommendations for health. Like the United                        
												
States (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008) and
United Kingdom (Department of Health UK, 2011), Canadian children
are advised to accumulate 60 min of moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity per day to maintain a healthy physiological and psychological
state of health; yet very few children in Canada, the US or the UK are
able to achieve this goal (Colley et al., 2011; Troiano et al., 2008; Cr
et al., 2009).
One source of physical activity, walking to/from school, has
been steadily declining over time; in the Greater Toronto Area, for
example, active school travel (AST) has dropped from 53% to 42%
in the am period, and from 56.7% to 49.5% in the pm period (1986–
2006) (Buliung et al., 2009). Trends in the United Kingdom are
similar, as rates of AST have decreased from 75% in 1975 to 55% in
2001 for children aged 5 to 10, and from 60% to 45% for children
aged 11–16 over the same time span (Pooley et al., 2005). In the

United States, the decreasing trend is even more apparent, with
AST mode share for 5 to 18 year olds having decreased by almost
30% between 1969 and 2001 (McDonald, 2007; Ham et al., 2008).
Alongside the decline in active travel, the proportion of Canadian
and US children classi<U+FB01>ed as being obese has increased (Tremblay
et al., 2010). The recent trends in childhood obesity are theorized
to be associated with decreasing levels of physical activity and
increasing engagement in sedentary behaviors such as automobile
usage (Spanier et al., 2006). Hence, there is a clear need to better
understand why valuable opportunities for daily physical activity
are not being utilized. Furthermore, a shift to more sustainable
modes of transportation like walking could reduce gas emissions
and air pollution, and alleviate congestion and safety hazards
around schools (Metrolinx, 2014).

1.1. Why do some parents drive?

Parents are assumed to be the ultimate decision makers when it
comes to whether their child can walk to school or not (McMillan,
2005). Yet the decision that parents ultimately make about the
school trip mode can be complex. Developed from a qualitative
study of parent/child interviews focused on AST, Faulkner et al.
(2010) described a two-stage AST decision-making process, with
one decision being whether or not the child needs escorting to/from
school, and the second decision being about mode choice, which is
largely in<U+FB02>uenced by issues of convenience. An extensive list of
correlates of AST (i.e., distance, time, safety) consequently factor
into this decision-making process.
Parents often cite traf<U+FB01>c danger as a major barrier to walking
and cycling to school (e.g. Cole et al., 2007; Kerr et al., 2006),
suggesting the potential of infrastructure improvements/modi<U+FB01>cations 
to the built environment as a means of facilitating AST.
Distance between home and school is one of the most important
determinants related to a child's mode of travel; as distance
increases, the likelihood of AST decreases (Wong et al., 2011).
Work by Mitra et al. (2010) in the Greater Toronto Area found that
distance from home to school had the strongest correlation with
mode choice; a 1 km decrease in distance increased the odds of
walking by 0.71 to 0.72 times. Consequently, a logical target for
AST initiatives are households where children are driven but live
within a walkable distance to/from school (i.e., r 2 km; Nelson
et al., 2008).
Accordingly, McDonald and Aalborg (2009) investigated the
reasons why children (between the ages of 10 and 14, living in the
San Francisco Bay Area), who live within two miles from school,
were driven. Reasons for driving fell into two main categories:
convenience and safety, with 75% of parents citing convenience as
a barrier, and 30% listing safety. Concerns about children's independent 
mobility to/from school were tied in with convenience
issues; the threat of “stranger danger” actually surpassed traf<U+FB01>c
fears and played a de<U+FB01>ning role for 75% of parents who did not
allow their children to walk to school without adult supervision.
These results speak to the importance of addressing time/convenience 
concerns alongside perceptions of safety in building models
to predict driving behavior. The results also suggest that such
“psychosocial variables” are in fact impacting decision-making
independent of environmental determinants. The authors did not
investigate characteristics of the home/school neighborhood or
route as predictors of driving within close proximity to school, and
therefore, we do not know what individual contributions these
components of the travel environment might make to understanding 
why different AST decisions are taken. To our knowledge,
this is a gap in the literature, an inquiry that stands to make an
important contribution to AST intervention efforts like the Safe
Routes to School initiative in the US (National Center for Safe
Routes to School, 2013) and School Travel Planning (STP) initiatives

in Canada (Green Communities Canada, 2013). School travel
planning is a multi-disciplinary, multi-sectoral, school-speci<U+FB01>c
intervention that engages key stakeholders (e.g., STP facilitator,
public health, police of<U+FB01>cials, municipal planners and traf<U+FB01>c
engineers, school boards, parents, children, school administrators
and teachers) in the survey and evaluation of school travel issues
(Green Communities Canada, 2013; see also Mammen et al., 2013).

1.2. The built environment

While three environmental components (the neighborhood
around the home, the route between home and school, and the
environment of the school) are typically considered (Lee and
Moudon, 2004; Panter et al., 2010), Mitra et al. (2010) recently
identi<U+FB01>ed the built environment around the child's residence to
have a stronger correlation with mode choice than the school
environment, the effect being strongest for home-to-school trips.
Consequently, it is appropriate to investigate the impact of the
built environment around the child's home on mode choice to
school.
Variables such as residential density, land use mix and era of
development are all proxy type characteristics of the built environment 
that are supposed to capture elements related to travel
behavior. While evidence may be more established in the adult
literature, no clear association currently exists for children's travel
patterns. Higher density neighborhoods are believed to be more
conducive to walking as they can decrease distances to possible
destinations. Ewing et al. (2004) found no connection between
residential density and rates for walking to school, but other
studies have determined that higher densities are positively
associated with AST (Braza et al., 2004; Kerr et al., 2007).
Land use mix, which again increases the number of potential
destinations accessible by foot, is commonly studied in the
children's literature, but <U+FB01>ndings are mixed to date. A few studies
have found a positive association between land use mix and AST
(Kerr et al., 2006; McMillan, 2007; Larsen et al., 2009), while
Ewing et al. (2004) found land use mix to be insigni<U+FB01>cant. More
research is needed to fully understand if and how land use mix
relates to children's school travel.
The con<U+FB01>guration of the street network may be an important
determinant in children's travel patterns, but more research is
needed to thoroughly understand the relationship. Intersection
density is a common measure of street connectivity or layout, but
does not account for the types of streets intersected. Intersection
density increases route options and directness, yet also raises the
number of intersections one must cross. A higher density of
intersections was found to be positively associated with AST
among a few studies (e.g., Braza et al., 2004; Schlossberg et al.,
2006; Kerr et al., 2007), while others have reported an inverse
relationship (Timperio et al., 2004; Ulfarsson and Shankar, 2008).
In an effort to more thoroughly understand how street network
design in<U+FB02>uences mode of travel among children, the current
study also examined the number of major intersections and
proportion of local roadways. These characteristics are rarely
assessed in the school travel literature, but should assist with
the understanding of how different types of streets (i.e. major
arterial or local road) in<U+FB02>uence mode choice for children.

2. Purpose

The objective of this paper was to build on the work of
McDonald and Aalborg (2009) and then extend it by an introduction 
of characteristics of the home/school neighborhood or route
into the predictive model. This research exercise is also about
engaging in knowledge translation and exchange (KTE) with an

agency of the Government of Ontario (Metrolinx), which was
created to improve the coordination and integration of all modes
of transportation in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area
(GTHA). A KTE network has already been established with Metrolinx, 
and the intent is that Metrolinx will communicate these
results to planning and health practitioners who are testing school
travel planning approaches in the GTHA through a project called
Stepping it Up (Metrolinx, 2011). To meet these objectives, this
study identi<U+FB01>es demographic characteristics, parent/family level
factors, attitudinal and psychosocial factors, route features, access
to vehicles, and environmental factors which appear to in<U+FB02>uence
the decision to drive children who live within a walkable distance
from school. The creation of a two-step prediction model, the <U+FB01>rst
being a “psychosocial” model, and the second being the inclusion
of built environment predictors into the model, identi<U+FB01>es the
unique contribution of built environment characteristics on the
decision to drive children who live in close proximity to school.

3. Methods

3.1. Geographic context

The GTHA is composed of the metropolitan areas of the cities of
Toronto and Hamilton, Ontario along with the regional municipalities 
of Durham, Halton, Peel and York. With a population of
over 6 million people, the GTHA is Canada's largest and most
culturally diverse metropolitan region (Statistics Canada, 2011).
The region has varying built environments spread across traditional 
downtown, inner and outer suburban areas. Marked differences 
in qualities of urban design, and transport infrastructure and
services, housing style, population density, era of development
and overall built environment can be found across the GTHA.
These differences are commonly associated with varying rates of
AST and automobile use (Handy et al., 2002; Frumkin et al., 2004).
Central city neighborhoods are found near the downtown core of
Toronto and Hamilton. Within the central city street networks are
more commonly connected (gridded), have a higher density of
intersections, shorter straight blocks, include higher building
densities and mixed use (Sewell, 1993). By contrast, in both the
inner and outer suburbs, the streets may be curvilinear, there is
more open space, land uses are segregated and lower density
housing exists (Sewell, 1993). Inner suburbs can be de<U+FB01>ned as
neighborhoods within the City of Toronto but outside of or farther
from the downtown core, whereas outer suburbs are newer areas
in the regional municipalities of Durham, Halton, Peel and York
(Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, 2009).

3.2. Study design

A School Travel Household Attitudinal Survey was conducted
over a 3-week period to provide the <U+FB01>rst in-depth GTHA-wide
picture of elementary school (children age 4–13 years, junior
kindergarten to grade eight) travel behavior, perceptions and
parental awareness of school travel programs. Computer-aided
telephone interviews were conducted with 1001 parents or guardians 
of children attending elementary school within the GTHA. The
sample was drawn from Harris/Decima's ASDE Survey Sampler
database based on Census Division (CD) from the 2006 Census.
Cases were weighted by the child's gender, grade and CD. The
survey response rate for the survey was 33.9%. Respondents living
within 2 km from school (n¼529) were selected for analyses and
dichotomized into: (a) drivers (n¼191) and, (b) walkers (n¼338).
Given our interest in predicting driving, the ‘walking' group also
included a small number of cyclists (n¼10). We acknowledge that
the determinants of cycling versus walking are likely to be different
but given the very low mode share for cycling this decision is
unlikely to have an effect on the results.

3.3. Measures

3.3.1. Household demographics

Demographic information was collected on both the parent and
eldest child. Parental demographics included age (18–34, 35–44,
45–54, 4 55 years), gender, employment status (employed [fullor part-time], 
not employed, stay-at-home/student/parental
leave), primary language spoken at home (English vs. other), and
weekly minutes of walking. Child demographics included eldest
child's age and gender, and number of children attending elementary school.

3.3.2. Parent/family level factors

Parents were also asked to report on how they themselves
travelled to school as a child (drive or carpool, walk or bike, other
mode), and also at what age they would allow their child to travel

to/from school without adult accompaniment.

3.3.3. Attitudinal factors

Parents were asked questions to gauge perceptions regarding
alternative modes for their child's school travel. Attitudes towards
the following constructs were examined: neighborhood safety;
walking and biking safety; interest in trying alternative travel
modes; importance of exercise during the school trip; and importance 
of travelling to school in an environmental-friendly way.
Parents were asked to cite the main reason for the mode choice for
their child's school travel from <U+FB01>ve options including (a) it is the
only option, (b) it is the most convenient way, (c) after-school
activities, (d) concerns about other methods, (e) my child prefers
to go that way and (f) a health issue/mobility impairment.

3.3.4. Route features

Time taken to travel to school was assessed using the response
options of (a) 0–5 min, (b) 6–10 min, and (c) 410 min. Distance in
kilometers between the household and the child's school was
assessed using the response options of (a) o1 km, (b) 1–2 km, and
(c) 42 km.

3.3.5. Access to vehicles

Parents were asked to report the number of vehicles in their
household, and the number of household members with valid
driving licenses. A vehicle-to-licensed drivers ratio was computed
and used for analyses.

3.3.6. Built environmental factors

Survey data were geocoded to the geographic center of the
identi<U+FB01>ed home address postal code. Within the sample of 529
respondents, 503 (95%) had valid postal codes. Postal codes are
commonly used in Canadian research as they allow for anonymity
of participants, but are also reasonable proxies for the home
address in urban environments (Bow et al., 2004). Unlike US Zip
Codes, Canadian postal codes represent relatively small spatial
units in urban areas (they are larger in rural districts) which
identify the address to the block face in urban areas. Neighborhood 
straight line buffers were created around each of the
respondents' postal codes to analyze characteristics of the built
environment. In an effort to capture attributes immediately
around the home, a radius of 500 m commencing at the geographic 
center of the home postal code was applied. A straight-line
buffer and distance of 500 m are commonly used in research
examining the built environment around the home (Larsen et al.,
2009; Berke et al., 2007).

Data on street networks and land use were obtained from DMTI
Route Logistics dataset, while population counts and era of
development were gathered from Statistics Canada (DMTI, 2009;
Statistics Canada, 2011). Population density was determined by
taking the total number of people at census block level, divided by
the total area of residential land (square kilometers) within each
buffer. Era of development was computed at the dissemination area
level (as only population and dwelling counts exist at the block
level in Canada in order to protect the anonymity of respondents).
Era of development is used as a proxy for neighborhood type. It
was calculated by <U+FB01>nding the proportion of buildings built in
dissemination areas within the buffer prior to 1946. The year 1946
was selected to represent a proxy for pre and post war (World War
2) neighborhoods. Development patterns changed in the post war
era, land uses started to become segregated, residential densities
were lower, and the street design moved away from the gridded
street network to a curvilinear design with a planned street
hierarchy (Sewell, 1993). Since this study takes place at the
regional scale and includes contrasting neighborhood environments 
(i.e. central city, inner and outer suburbs) it is important to
control and assess these differences.
Street design variables included intersection density, number of
intersections, and proportion of local roads. Intersection density
which increases route options was calculated by <U+FB01>nding the
number of 3- or 4-way intersections per square kilometer. In an
effort to more thoroughly understand how street crossings relate
to AST, the number of major intersections was also examined.
Since major street crossings are a common determinant of AST
(Larsen et al., in press, Wen et al., 2008), the number of major
intersections where arterial or collector streets intersected local
streets was calculated. Only major intersections (arterial or collector) 
were examined as it is may be that crossing local streets is
less of a concern for parents. This was computed using the street
classi<U+FB01>cation given in DMTI's Route Logistics (DMTI, 2009), and
gives a raw number of major and local street intersections for each
buffer. In order to account for the supply of smaller capacity road
facilities, likely to be more supportive environments for walking,
the proportion of local roads variable was created. This was
calculated by taking the total distance of local roads divided by
the total length of all roadways within each buffer. The values
range from 0 meaning no local roads to 1 (all local roads). Finally,
land use parcels were again obtained through the DMTI Route
Logistics dataset (DMTI, 2009). Land use mix was compiled using
an entropy index in a similar manner to previous work on the built
environment (Frank et al., 2004; Leslie et al., 2007; Larsen et al.,
2009). An entropy index calculates how evenly each land use is
distributed throughout each of the six classes. Land use parcels
were classi<U+FB01>ed into 6 broad categories: residential, resource and
industrial, government and institutional, commercial, open area,
along with parks and recreational. The total area for each classi<U+FB01>cation 
was calculated for every buffer and the distribution was
calculated using the following entropy formula:

lu is the land use classi<U+FB01>cation (i.e. residential); p is the proportion
of land area dedicated to a speci<U+FB01>c land use; and n is the total
number of land use classi<U+FB01>cations (i.e. six). Scores range from zero
to one, with zero representing all land in a buffer being single land
use (e.g., all residential), and one representing an even distribution
of all six land use classi<U+FB01>cations.

3.4. Statistical analyses
Descriptive statistics were used to examine household demographics 
and attitudinal variables. Independent samples t-tests and
chi-square analyses were used to test for group differences (drivers

[n¼ 191] and walkers [n¼338]) on the continuous and categorical
factors, respectively, related to household demographics, parent/
family level factors, attitudes, route features, and access to vehicles.
Only those variables which were signi<U+FB01>cantly (po.05) different
between the two groups were entered into the logistic regression
model to predict driving. The one exception to this rule was for the
variables assessing child's age and gender. Given that age and
gender have been shown to be signi<U+FB01>cant correlates of school travel
behavior (Sirard and Slater, 2008), these variables were included in
the regression model in Block 1 regardless of the results from the
univariate analyses. For the logistic regression analysis, a hierarchical 
approach was used where household demographics variables
were entered <U+FB01>rst (Block 1), followed by parent/family level factors
(Block 2), attitudinal factors (Block 3), route features (Block 4), and
vehicle to licensed drivers ratio (Block 5).
To examine the additional variance explained by the environmental 
factors, a second logistic regression was conducted with all
measures of the built environment entered in three additional
blocks: era of development (Block 6), land use and density (Block
7), and street connectivity (Block 8). Since several of the environmental 
variables are inter-related, cross-correlation was tested
among all of these factors. While it is possible for certain features
such as intersection density, sum of major and minor intersections
and proportion of local roads to be correlated, no such multicollinearity 
issues were found. The Omnibus chi-square test
(p o.05) and Hosmer and Lemeshow test (p 4.05) were used to
determine model <U+FB01>t, while the Nagelkerke's R2 was used as an
index of variance explained. All analyses were conducted using
SPSS 18 (IBM, PASW Statistics). Only those respondents with
complete data were included in the regression analyses (n ¼359).
An alpha level of.05 was used for all statistical tests.

4. Results

4.1. Sample characteristics

Table 1 provides the demographic characteristics for the overall
sample, as well as for drivers and walkers separately. The mean
age of the overall parent sample was 40.54 77.46 years, with the
majority of the sample between 35 and 44 years of age (52%),
female (59%), and employed (70%). English (77%) was the primary
language spoken in the household. The majority of parents
reported only one child attending elementary school (60%), while
an additional 33% had two, and 8% had three or more children
attending elementary school.

4.2. Group differences on measured psychosocial factors

4.2.1. Household demographics
Chi-square analyses revealed no signi<U+FB01>cant differences
between parents who walk their children to school versus those
who drive their children on any of the measured parental demographic 
variables listed in Table 1. In terms of child demographic
variables, signi<U+FB01>cant group differences were found for gender,
<U+03C7>2(1) ¼6.93, p o0.01, with signi<U+FB01>cantly more females being driven
to school (58.3%) than walking (45.9%). Children being driven to
school were also signi<U+FB01>cantly less likely to travel to and from
school with other school-aged children, <U+03C7>2(1) ¼50.0, p o0.001, in
comparison to walkers (30% versus 62%, respectively). No signi<U+FB01>cant 
between-group differences were found on child age (p ¼ 0.60),
or the number of children attending elementary school (p ¼ 0.86).
4.2.2. Parent/family level factors

Drivers were signi<U+FB01>cantly less comfortable with letting their
child walk to school without adult accompaniment in comparison

4.2.3. Attitudinal factors

Parents who drove their children to school tended to be more
worried about strangers and bullies approaching their child if they
travelled alone in comparison to those parents whose children
walked to school, <U+03C7>2(4)¼16.46, p¼ 0.002. Signi<U+FB01>cantly fewer
drivers had discussed how to walk or cycle to school safely with
their children (74%) versus walkers (90%), <U+03C7>2(4) ¼43.62, po 0.001.
Drivers were more interested in considering alternatives to the
way that their child currently travels than walkers, <U+03C7>2(4) ¼19.66,
p ¼0.001. Drivers were signi<U+FB01>cantly less likely to perceive the trip
to/from school as having an important contribution to daily
exercise, <U+03C7>2(4) ¼114.57, p o0.000. While 76% of walkers strongly
agreed that it was important that their child gets exercise while
travelling to and from school, only 31% of drivers believed this to
be the case. A signi<U+FB01>cantly greater proportion of walkers (78%) in
comparison to drivers (64%) believed that it was important that
their child gets to and from school in an environment-friendly
way, <U+03C7>2(4)¼ 18.29, p ¼0.001. More walkers (55%) than drivers (34%)
indicated ‘convenience’ to be the main reason for school travel
mode choice, more so than other factors (e.g., safety, work/school
scheduling con<U+FB02>icts), <U+03C7>2(4)¼18.29, p ¼0.001.


4.2.4. Route features

The time taken to travel to school was signi<U+FB01>cantly lower for
drivers than walkers, <U+03C7>2(2) ¼45.81, p ¼0.000, with 75% of drivers
taking less than 5 min to travel in comparison to 45% of walkers.

4.2.5. Access to vehicles

Drivers were more likely to have access to a car, <U+03C7>2(3) ¼25.45,
po 0.001, and reported more licensed drivers within their households 
than walkers, <U+03C7>2(3)¼ 20.95, po 0.001. For example, 44% of
walkers either did not have a car (7%) or only had access to one car
(36%), while the vast majority of drivers had access to two or more
cars (75%) and at least two drivers per household (93%).

4.3. Psychosocial logistic regression model of driving to school

Overall, the 12 variables entered into the regression model
explained 44% of the variance in driving to school (Table 2). The
model was found to have a good <U+FB01>t (Omnibus test: <U+03C7>2(12) ¼ 131.85,
po .001; Hosmer and Lemeshow test: <U+03C7>2(8)¼ 14.40, p ¼.07). Of the
12 variables included in the model, seven were found to be
signi<U+FB01>cant predictors of driving to school (see Table 2 for odds
ratios and CIs). Having a female child (OR ¼0.56), travelling to
school with other children (OR ¼3.93), older reported age for child
to walk to school without adult accompaniment (OR¼ 1.18), less
discussion of how to walk or cycle to school safely (OR ¼0.75),
greater parental interest in alternative school travel modes
(OR¼ 1.28), lesser perception of the trip to/from school as being
an important contribution to daily exercise (OR ¼0.52), and greater
distance to travel to school (OR¼ 2.80) were signi<U+FB01>cant correlates
of driving to school. In addition, when parents indicated other
reasons besides convenience as the main reason for their child's
travel mode, there was a greater likelihood that they would drive
their child to school (OR ¼0.60).


4.3.1. The built environment and explaining driving to school

Overall, the six environmental variables entered into the
regression model explained an additional 4% of the variance in
driving to school, resulting in a total explained variance of 48%.
The <U+FB01>nal model was found to have a good <U+FB01>t (Omnibus test:
<U+03C7>2(18) ¼147.10, p o.001; Hosmer and Lemeshow test: <U+03C7>2(8) ¼
14.65, p ¼.07). Of the 18 variables included in the full regression
model, eight were found to be signi<U+FB01>cant predictors of driving to
school (see Table 3 for odds ratios and CIs). In terms of the
psychosocial variables, older reported age for child to walk to
school without adult accompaniment (OR¼ 1.15), travelling to
school with other children (OR ¼4.03), less discussion of how to
walk or cycle to school safely (OR ¼0.75), greater parental interest
in alternative school travel modes (OR¼ 1.35), lesser parental
perception of the trip to/from school as being an important
contribution to daily exercise (OR¼ 0.48), and greater distance to
travel to school (OR ¼2.65 for 1–2 km versus 4 1 km) were all
signi<U+FB01>cant correlates of driving to school. Meanwhile, for the built
environment variables, greater proportion of local roads
(OR ¼1.04) and number of major and minor intersections
(OR ¼1.11) were signi<U+FB01>cant correlates of driving to school.

5. Discussion

While at the elementary school level parents are the ultimate
decision-makers on how their child travels to school, policy
makers and school administrators must understand the basis on
which parental decisions are made, including perceptions of the
built environment and social factors, such as convenience, safety,
and the degree of perceived social capital in the community.
Program interventions should be designed to improve perceptions
of AST by identifying and addressing both real and perceived
barriers and introducing local solutions.
This is one of the <U+FB01>rst studies to investigate the decision to
drive to school when living in close proximity (r 2 km), using a
2-step prediction model: the <U+FB01>rst step examining the in<U+FB02>uence of
psychosocial variables (demographics, parent/family level factors,
attitudinal factors, route features, access to vehicles) and the
second step examining the in<U+FB02>uence of built environment factors
(population density, era of development, intersection density,
number of intersections, proportion of local roads, land use mix).
We found evidence that attitudinal variables, route features and
built environment factors were signi<U+FB01>cant predictors of driving
children who live less than 2 km away from school. Notably, the
introduction of built environment characteristics in the <U+FB01>nal
model only explained an additional 4% of the variance in driving
to school, resulting in a total explained variance of 48%. This
suggests that in the GTHA, the social environment has a stronger
role to play than the built environment (only as measured by the
variables included in our model) in in<U+FB02>uencing driving behavior
within close proximity to school. In fact, common attributes of the
built environment such as: population density, mixed land uses
and the density of intersections were not signi<U+FB01>cant predictors in
the model.
Many of these environmental variables are common within the
adult literature and conceptually relate to mode of travel. As
previously stated, for children the relationship between population 
density, land use mix, intersection density and school travel is
less clear. These results may also relate to the method of measurement. 
Land use mix was calculated using an entropy index, which
is a common approach in both the child and adult literature (Frank
et al. 2004; Leslie et al. 2007; Larsen et al. 2009; Larsen et al.
2012); however, does having a perfectly mixed environment
actually relate to school travel? While a perfect land use mix
may relate to adult travel patterns, having industrial lands around

the home, likely does not encourage walking to school. In an
entropy index, a value of 1 represents an even mix of all land use
categories. For school travel, a lower value which includes only
residential, parks and open spaces is probably more bene<U+FB01>cial for
walking than busier commercial and industrial areas. In the end,
land use mix was not a signi<U+FB01>cant characteristic in this study, and
perhaps future work should apply different measures of land use
mix for children to more accurately capture what may be important 
for children's mobility.
Era of development, which is a proxy variable for neighborhood
design was also not signi<U+FB01>cant. The proportion of local roads and
the number of major and minor street intersections were the only
built environment characteristics that were signi<U+FB01>cant predictors
in the <U+FB01>nal model. The number of major and minor street
intersections was positively associated with driving to school. This
is an interesting <U+FB01>nding as it relates to traf<U+FB01>c safety and street
crossings. Having to cross a street is thought to be a key element of
pedestrian safety (Larsen et al., 2012). Crossing streets puts the
child at a risk for being hit by a motor vehicle; the number of, and
type of street crossing, may play a role in mode choice. Major
street crossings may be perceived as more dangerous than crossing 
local neighborhood streets. While evidence is somewhat
mixed as to how street crossings in<U+FB02>uence travel mode for
children, our <U+FB01>nding is similar to those of other studies, where
crossing major streets were signi<U+FB01>cant determinants of AST
(Larsen et al., 2012; Wen et al., 2008).
The proportion of local roads was positively associated with
driving to school. Why more local roads was a determinant of
driving is unclear; it was hypothesized that more local roads
would encourage active travel, as local roads are typically perceived 
as more pedestrian friendly and safer. This variable may be
acting as a proxy for other built environment characteristics or
relate to neighborhood type. A higher proportion of local roads,
typically relates to a more suburban neighborhood where major
arterials with high traf<U+FB01>c volume and fast moving vehicles are
present. Even though proportionally, the neighborhood is made up
of mostly local streets, the arterials in the suburban neighborhood
are extremely busy and may be perceived as dangerous for
children to cross. In the central city, the street network is more
likely to be mixed with a combination of local, collectors and
arterials. Consistent with McDonald and Aalborg (2009), we found
that concerns over safety and independent mobility were important 
predictors of driving. Objective indicators of intersection
density and proportion of local roads suggest traf<U+FB01>c safety concerns 
are real for these parents. This is perhaps re<U+FB02>ected in
reduced independent mobility of these children given that parents
who drive their child think the child should be older to travel
unescorted to school. McDonald et al., 2010 present an interesting
case study by Coleman (1988) to highlight how parental beliefs
about the neighborhood social environment can affect children's
travel behavior. In his analysis of this case study, Coleman, a major
theorist on social capital, came to the conclusion that parental
decision-making is heavily in<U+FB02>uenced by perceived differences in
the levels of social capital between neighborhoods. In their paper,
McDonald et al. incorporate a dimension of the social environment
borrowed from Sampson et al. (1999), child-centered social control, 
the expectation that neighborhood residents can and will
intervene on the behalf of children. The authors discovered an
association between parental perceptions of child-centered social
control and walking and biking to school, with associations
stronger for girls and minority groups (McDonald et al., 2010).
Our dataset also reinforced the notion that school travel continues
to be a gendered practice, with more girls being driven to school
than boys. Parents who made the decision to drive their children
were less likely to have discussed with their child how to walk or
cycle to school safely and these children were less likely to have

other children to travel to school with. Policies, at all levels, must
support school/family and community partnerships: promoting
greater social capital in communities may contribute to the
sustainability of AST interventions. Interventions should be
designed to create positive social capital by informing local
merchants, residents and community groups about AST initiatives
and welcoming their involvement.
Our <U+FB01>ndings also highlight that AST can be a convenient option.
McDonald and Aalborg (2009) found that convenience was the
most common reason for driving. In contrast, parents in our study
whose children walked to school were more likely to give convenience 
as the reason for this travel mode. Distance may contribute
to this <U+FB01>nding. Even within two kilometers from school, distance
was a signi<U+FB01>cant predictor of driving behavior (i.e., drivers were
more likely to have a greater distance to travel to school than
walkers (OR¼ 2.65 for 1–2 km versus 41 km). For short trips,
walking may indeed be more convenient than driving. Alternatively,
other barriers are more important than convenience; for example,
19.8% of drivers reported that driving was the ‘only option’ in
comparison to 7.9% of walking parents. Regardless of the reasons for
this <U+FB01>nding, it emphasizes the need to examine how AST modes can
be made more convenient for driving households.
Like the U.S. (National Center for Safe Routes to School, 2013)
and the U.K. (Sustrans, 2011), Canada has been supporting AST for
some time now. A national, community-based comprehensive
approach called School Travel Planning (STP) has emerged
(Green Communities Canada, 2013), and provincial organizations
like Metrolinx (2011) are engaging in KTE with associated partners
to disseminate “best practice” approaches for fostering AST using
the STP model through projects like Stepping It Up. The STP
intervention involves mobilization of key community stakeholders
(governments, parents, children, teachers, school administrators)
for the purpose of addressing school-speci<U+FB01>c barriers and facilitators 
to AST. Walking School Bus (WSB) schemes are among a
handful of “action plan” items within a school STP which may also

include safety training, and infrastructure improvements (Buliung
et al., 2011).
WSB schemes hold some promise in encouraging AST among
households within a walkable distance from school and might
offer a means of tackling some of the “predictors” of driving
behavior within our model. For one, WSB programs provide the
option for children who would otherwise be driven to travel with a
group of children and adult volunteers. These schemes also
provide a means of adult supervision, a way to alleviate independent 
mobility barriers, such as intersections, faced by children that
are driven to school. The introduction and maintenance of WSB
schemes also has great potential to in<U+FB02>uence and improve perceived 
neighborhood social capital. The schemes offer a way for
members of a community to interact (Kingham and Ussher, 2007;
Mackett et al., 2003), and there is evidence that community
interaction is connected to AST (Hume et al., 2009). Perhaps
embedded in this is the need to inform drivers of the value of
the trip to school as a consistent opportunity for physical activity
(and means of attaining daily physical activity recommendations
for health), given the <U+FB01>nding that such parents were more likely to
have lesser perceptions about the trip to school as making an
important contribution towards daily activity.

6. Conclusions

Overall, offering non-infrastructure programs that provide adult
supervision, such as WSB Schemes, may be a more powerful strategy
to alleviate safety concerns while potentially reducing the parental

time costs of escorting the child, than capital projects targeting
changes to the built environment. However, more research and

practice attention should be focused on how to implement WSB
schemes in a way that is sustainable. It is necessary to establish
support systems to overcome the challenges faced in practicing AST:
Parents and school personnel alike must sometimes overcome a
large array of internal and external challenges to transform their
regular perceptions and behaviors. Training for practitioners can
promote parental and staff roles in behavior change. Having practitioners, 
such as school administrators and school health nurses, learn
by doing; being responsible for collaborating with parents, families,
and community and business members; and re<U+FB02>ecting on effective
strategies in group and professional development settings as a
regular part of their ongoing work can be a powerful strategy to
build capacity and overcome challenges. Understanding how to
empower these stakeholders as key players in activities such as
school travel planning, and how to mobilize their community to
support children and parents in using AST modes, remains a research
and practice priority.