Stranger Danger, Cell Phones, Traffic,
and Active Travel to and from Schools
Perceptions of Parents and Children

This paper summarizes one-on-one interviews with parents and their
middle school children to identify similarities and differences in parents’
and children’s perceptions of the environment that surrounds travel to
and from school, how these perceptions form, and how they influence travel
mode choice to and from school. Forty-eight interviews were conducted
with parent–child pairs in three New Jersey communities. In particular, 
the interviews examined active travel modes, such as walking and
bicycling, to and from school. Direct communication with parents and
students allowed for a thick description of perspectives and concerns.
Analysis of qualitative data showed differences in adult versus child
perceptions and the emergence of several themes related to the environment 
and children’s capacity for independence. Themes included
differences in comfort with solo travel, which depended on time of day,
parental concern with abductions and sexual offenders, common use of
cell phones and GPS technology to address safety fears, and perceptions
with respect to the safety of travel modes on the basis of gender. Implications 
for practice included the support of opportunities for children
to walk in groups, such as the designation of meet-up locations, where
students could gather without parental accompaniment, and the encouragement 
of Walk to School and Walk from School days to help parents
and students become comfortable with walking trips. To help children
attain the benefits of active travel, schools and communities also could
provide skills-based education on personal safety and could identify safe
areas, where students could go if problems arose.

One of the ways that children can obtain more physical activity is
through active travel, primarily by walking or bicycling to and from
school. However, the number of U.S. students who walk or bicycle 
to school is at a historic low (1). Nationally, many schools and
communities encourage walking and bicycling under Safe Routes to
School programming. However, parents and sometimes their children
commonly hold negative perceptions of how safe it is to walk or to
bicycle. The research reported here aimed to identify parent and child
per­ceptions of the built and social environment, how these perceptions
were formed, and how they influenced travel mode choice.
To gain a deeper understanding of the perceived safety issues,
one-on-one interviews were conducted with parents or guardians and

their middle school students. Qualitative methods (i.e., interviews)
provide the opportunity for researchers to gather detailed descriptive
information, ask follow-up questions, and pursue extended dialogue
on topics of concern that arise from initial questions. Middle school
students (ages 11 to 14) were chosen instead of elementary school
students because of their ability to be more independent and to better
articulate their perceptions during an interview than younger children.
The interviews of middle school students also increased the potential
for their participation in solo travel to school. A parent and his or
her child were interviewed individually so that each was able to talk
freely without outside influence. Interviews with parents and students
made it possible to identify facilitators and barriers to active travel,
in addition to perceptions of the built and social environment and
how these perceptions affected travel mode choice.
This qualitative analysis identified similarities and differences in
parents’ and children’s perceptions and common themes from interviews 
collected in three New Jersey communities. In this paper
emergent themes are highlighted and described through representative
quotes from participants. Implications of the findings on Safe Routes
to School programming, future research needs, and ways to improve
industry practice are included.
Over the past 40 years, active travel has been on the decline,
especially by children. Only 12.9% of all U.S. schoolchildren used
active travel to school in 2001 compared with 40% in 1969 (1, 2).
Active travel decline occurred even by those who lived close to school.
In the 1960s, more than 85% of students who lived within a mile of
a school walked, while by the early 2000s fewer than half walked to
school (1). During this same time, driving to school increased from
approximately 20% to 55% (1). Active travel decline and a concurrent
increase in passive travel are of concern with respect to declining
physical activity rates, rising obesity rates, worsening air quality,
increased traffic (3), and decreased independence (4). Declining
physical activity has become grave enough to seize the attention
of physicians, public health officials, parents, schools, planners, and
policy makers, who now seek possible solutions.
Perceptions inform our thoughts and influence the way in which
we make decisions in our environment (5). They are important to
examine, because they have been shown to influence how people
decide to travel. In addition, people’s perceptions do not always agree
d’s
with measured features, such as traffic speed or volume. In one study,
almost 1,300 adults in a telephone survey in Forsyth County, North
Carolina, and in Jackson, Mississippi, were asked about high-speed
traffic and a lack of sidewalks as barriers to physical activity (6).
Speed, volume, and street connectivity also were measured with a
geographic information system. Participants’ perceptions of environmental 
characteristics (e.g., traffic speed, volume) were poorly

associated with actual speed and volume, which demonstrates the
weight given to perception versus reality when decisions are made
about travel (6). Similarly, in a 1987 telephone survey of U.S. parents
with at least one child under age 13, the level of concern about abductions 
by strangers was high relative to the data on actual rates (7). In
addition, parents were less concerned about pedestrian injuries, automobile 
accidents, bicycle injuries, and drowning, although the risks of
their occurrence were substantially higher than they were of abduction
(7). The variation between people’s perceptions and what the statistics 
or measured features indicate demonstrates that it is important to
examine perceptions and their influence on mode choice.
Some studies have examined associations between adults’ perceptions 
of the environment and children’s active travel, including
perceptions of personal safety. In several studies, adults’ negative
perceptions of safety were found to be associated with reduced
active travel to school by their children. In one study, caregivers
rated their perceptions of neighborhood personal safety by ranking
their agreement with the following statement, “the neighborhood is
not safe for a child to walk/bike to/from school alone.” For every unit
increase (an increase in lack of perceived safety) the odds of walking
to school declined 13% (8). Thus the more caregivers perceived
the neighborhood to be safe, the higher the odds that their children
used active travel to get to or from school. In London, parents who
were found to worry about abduction or molestation were four or
more times likely to drive their children to or from school than those
“not at all” worried about abduction or molestation (9). Similarly,
Kerr et al. found that a combination of factors in an overall parental
concern variable had the strongest explanatory power to determine
whether a child participated in active travel (10). Parents with “few
concerns” were five times more likely to allow their children to
participate in active travel than those with “many concerns” (10).
Thus parents’ perceptions of safety may be an important factor that
influences their children’s travel mode.
Although traffic is commonly cited as a barrier to children’s active
travel (11, 12), several studies have found no relationship between
parents’ perceptions of traffic and children’s mode of travel to school
(9, 10, 13). In studies that have found an association, parental perceptions 
of traffic have varied by age and sex. Parents of older children 
have expressed less concern about traffic safety than parents
of younger children (14), and parental perceptions of heavy traffic
were negatively associated with active travel for boys, although
not for girls in one study (15). More recently, in a study that used
multivariate-ordered response models, parents of boys and older
children in the Los Angeles, Riverside, Orange County, metropolitan
statistical area of California were less likely to be concerned about
crime and traffic speed than were parents of girls and younger children 
(16). Parents may be more protective of these latter two groups
because younger children are less likely to be able to negotiate situations 
if any problems arise and parents may have social tendencies 
to characterize girls as more vulnerable. These possible gender
differences remain important in the examination of how to increase
active travel rates, despite inconclusive evidence of their impact.
Moreover, perceptions of traffic may vary widely across geography
and thus should be examined in context.

INTERVIEWS

One-on-one, in-depth interviews were conducted with 48 parent–
guardians (i.e., all of whom are referred to here as “parents”)

of middle school students from three New Jersey communities

(i.e., one in northwest and two in central New Jersey) from May
2013 to November 2014. Each parent interview was followed by a
one-on-one, in-depth interview with the parent’s child, who was a
middle school student (i.e., in Grades 6 to 8, ages 11 to 14). The
interviews were conducted with parents and children individually
so that their perceptions could be examined not only more deeply
through the analysis of qualitative data but also for the similarities
and differences between parent and child perceptions, along with
what factors might have influenced their perceptions.

Site Selection

Middle schools were selected in three New Jersey municipalities
(i.e., Highland Park, Stanhope, and Franklin Township) for their
varied yet suburban built environments. These locations were
purposefully selected to examine variations across communities
with different densities and socioeconomic status.
Highland Park is a community just across the Raritan River from
New Brunswick in central New Jersey. Graduate students and Rutgers
University faculty dominate the borough; more than 60% of the
borough’s residents hold at least a bachelor’s degree. Highland Park
has a gridded street pattern, a downtown, and sidewalks are ubiquitous. 
In contrast, Stanhope is a municipality in the rural northwest
part of the state; slightly more than 30% of the borough’s residents
hold at least a bachelor’s degree. Outside of a small downtown with
sidewalks and shops, the street network is not gridded and a busy,
curving, high-speed state road runs through the town. Franklin Township 
is a large municipality located 4 mi from Highland Park. The
built environment in Franklin Township varies, however. Near the
middle school there, sidewalks are intermittent, and several busy
county roads dominate. There is no gridded downtown, and there are
many higher-speed winding roads. Basic socioeconomic characteristics 
of the three communities are shown in Table 1. The characteristics
of the schools that the children attend are shown in Table 2.

Instrument

Semistructured, in-person, in-depth qualitative interviews that lasted
approximately 40 to 60 min were conducted with each parent. The
middle school student’s interview protocol was similar, but the
student interview was only 20 to 30 min in length, because students
typically had fewer concerns, and parents provided information
about their child’s travel to and from school in addition to memories

of their own. Parents also described their municipality in greater depth
and what brought them to live in that community. The protocol was
approved by the Rutgers University Institutional Review Board, and
all interview responses were kept confidential. Participation was
voluntary, and the primary investigator conducted all interviews for
consistency.

Recruitment

Participants were recruited through a variety of means. In Highland
Park and Stanhope, a relationship was formed with the school district
superintendent, who sent an e-mail home to all middle school parents 
with information about the study. Parents called or e-mailed and
set up times to be interviewed. In addition, snowball sampling was
used, through which participants suggested additional interviewees 
for the study. In Franklin Township, the principal, a vice principal, 
and the head of the parent–teacher–student organization helped
communicate the project to all parents. The school did not have
an e-mail distribution system for all parents, so a request for their
participation in the interviews was sent to the 100 parents registered
with the parent–teacher–student organization, who were asked to
forward the request. Notices about the interviews also were left
at eighth grade graduation events and at the school front desk,
where parents were required to check in when they entered school
grounds. An announcement about the interviews was made at Back
to School Night, which many parents attended to learn about their
child’s classes. Parents called or e-mailed to set up times to be
interviewed, and snowball sampling was used to recruit additional
participants.

Parents in Highland Park received no compensation for their
interview time. However, parents in Stanhope and Franklin Township
received $20 for their participation, given the difficulty of participant 
recruitment in these locations. Interviews were performed with
individuals who met two sampling criteria: (a) parent of at least
one child currently in Grades 6 to 8 at the designated schools and (b)
parents and children without access to bus transportation to school.
This second criterion was included to ensure that children in the study
did not live so far from school that they had no option to bicycle or
walk there. Thus inclusion in the interviews was limited to parents
whose children were not eligible to take a school bus. Parents could
then talk about their travel mode choice and not have to state that there
was no other choice because they lived too far from the school for
their children to use active travel. Given the size of the communities,
no bus transportation to and from school was offered in Stanhope or in
most of Highland Park (aside from a small part of town considered to
be located along a hazardous route). However, bus transportation was

available to those students who lived more than 2 mi from the middle
school in Franklin Township.

Analysis and Results

The parent and student interviews were audio recorded (when acceptable 
to the participant) to ensure that quotes were verbatim. Field
notes were taken by hand and then typed and expanded on promptly
after each interview to ensure accuracy and to improve the richness
of responses for coding. Data were analyzed according to sensitizing
concepts and inductive emergent themes with the use of comparative
content analysis and thematic analysis (Table 3).
In the 48 parent and 48 student interviews conducted, several
themes emerged. Many of the parents, primarily from Stanhope and
Franklin Township, described the “chaos” that occurred, particularly 
in the mornings, as they tried to get their children to school.
Several parents in Franklin Township and in Stanhope stated that
they had quit their jobs, “asked for a transfer,” or “took a late lunch”
to drive to school, pick their children up, and drop them off at home.
Several parents stated that they paid for transportation, or for afterschool 
care with transportation, which demonstrated what parents
felt they needed to do to ensure that their children arrived home
safely. Many “wished” school bus transportation were available and
stated that they thought access to busing would “vastly simplify”
their lives. Parents in Highland Park, where more students walked to
and from school, did not describe their mornings as chaotic.

Time of Day

Parents and students described the variation in the mode of transportation 
used in the morning with that used in the afternoon. Most students
said that their mode preference varied by time of day. Most parents
and students in Franklin Township and Stanhope and some in Highland 
Park were concerned about being late in the morning. Thus
students were more likely to be driven in the morning. Some parents
did not mind driving their children to school in the morning, because
it was “not out of the way”: parents dropped their children off and
then continued on to work.
In the afternoon, most students in Highland Park and Stanhope
stated that they preferred to walk home, because it was “fun,” and
there was “no reason to rush.” Most students in all three communities
indicated that they would be willing to walk a little out of their way
to walk with classmates, particularly in the afternoon when they
were less time-constrained, because to walk in a group made the trip
feel safer and more enjoyable. More students reported walking home
in the afternoon than reported walking to school in the morning. Of
those that did not walk home in the afternoon, many said that they
would have wanted to. However, in the morning many students preferred 
to be driven so that they could sleep in and would not be late.
Even students in Highland Park who described walking to school
almost every day stated that they got an occasional ride when they
were running late. Students’ thoughts from all three schools were
similar as follows:

If I walked, I’d have to get up a lot earlier and I don’t like to get up early

I have more time to get ready when I get driven, I get to sleep more.
There’s not a big group in the morning maybe one or two people.
Not a lot of people walk in the morning, it’s easier to walk home.

I get to sleep in later when I get a ride. In spring sometimes I get up
early and walk, but I have to get up half hour earlier. Mostly I’m driven
in the morning but can walk home.

Abductions and Sexual Offenders

Commonly, parent interview participants in Stanhope and Franklin
Township described their primary concern about their middle school
student as related to child abduction. In contrast, only two parents
of 18 children in Highland Park mentioned the issue at all. Parents
commented that “times had changed,” and that, “in the world we
live in,” everyone had to be careful. A Stanhope parent stated that
she “assumes everyone is a predator,” while others described being
aware that “anything could happen,” which made them nervous to
allow their children to walk or bicycle.
You never know where the creeps are coming from, I read a book once
and a girl who was 12 years old gets picked up from a bus stop. It was
based on a true story, so you never know. No matter how much you can
tell the kids don’t talk to strangers and all that, they can intimidate the
kids with guns and knives and take them, they’re just kids.

My primary concern is abduction, that I wouldn’t see my little girl
again. It’s all over the news.

My daughter does no walking at all for safety reasons. You look on the
news and there is just too much going on all over. It’s personal safety,
you read about all the different things that are happening nearby and
it’s scary. There are incidents with strange people, you know?

Several parents, particularly parents of girls, mentioned that they
were specifically afraid of sexual offenders. These parents commonly 
started in on the topic by discussing “strangers” more broadly
before they described their concern about sexual offenders in more
detail. Five parents mentioned that, to stay informed and keep their
children safe, they checked sexual offender websites to see if there
were any offenders in the neighborhood.

I also look at the sexual offenders and the area gang activity online.

I checked the sex offenders list when we were looking at houses, my
wife is really against living near them and always is on the lookout on
the site, so we’re definitely concerned about that and traffic second.
There’s a site for sex offenders that is good to look at to know what
could happen to your child.

Some of the children interviewed (i.e., typically those whose parents 
voiced concern about predators) stated worries about being
kidnapped. However, the vast majority of students in Highland
Park and more than half in Franklin Township and Stanhope were
primarily concerned about traffic and the “crazy drivers who zoom”
and “don’t pay attention.”

I’m not too worried about being taken or anything, but the cars flying
when I’m on the side of the road scare me.

There are barely any sidewalks and when you’re going across the
street, no one will stop for you, it’s usually pretty busy, that’s the kind
of stuff I worry about, nothing else.

Students described themselves as being less concerned about kidnapping 
and predators because they knew people along their routes
to go to for help. They commonly said that they walked in groups,

which they felt was protective. Students were less likely to base
their perceptions on the media. They noted that they had “never
had a problem” walking and therefore did not anticipate a problem.

I know my way, I know everyone around, I know people here, I’m not
worried.

There are people on Hamilton and you can’t get snatched near people,
so I took all main roads [to get home] and so it’s fine.
I’ve never saw or heard anyone get hurt, so kids shouldn’t be worried.

It’s a small town, we know people and the area if anything happened,
know places you could run to if you got hurt or yards you could cut
through, we know where to go.

Cell Phones and GPS Technology

Most parents reported that they felt more comfortable when their
child had a cell phone regardless of the mode of transportation they
used. Parents felt that possession of a cell phone allowed them to
more easily know where their children were or to contact them,
particularly if something went wrong. Parents, notably in Stanhope
and Franklin Township, described their children as “needing to have
the cell phone on.” They “had to know” where their children were,
“particularly after school.” Overall, parents preferred their child to
have a cell phone, particularly if they were walking, so the child
could contact their parents and let them know where they were and
that they had arrived at destinations safely. Parents commented that
they got their children cell phones “earlier since they sometimes
walk.” A few stated that their child received a cell phone in third
grade. Thus, cell phones may be a facilitator of active travel. In

addition, several parents described “watching” their children walk
home from school via a GPS-enabled mobile application to ensure
that they got home safely. Others reported that they had debated
doing so. Although cell phones may make parents feel more comfortable 
and perhaps allow a greater number of students to walk,
this technology may also allow parents to maintain a higher level of
control and may rob their children of some level of independence,

because they need to “constantly check in.”
They won’t walk anywhere without the phone, I prefer for them not to,
so it’s win–win, they don’t want to and I don’t want them to.

My son wanted to walk and asked, I agreed. I got him a cell phone for
it. He has to call when he’s leaving and when he’s home.

They are required to have it on [cell phone] and text me all the time.
I’ve toyed with watching her cellularly. I’ve joked that I would do it.
I haven’t yet though, I know I’m overprotective.
I can watch her from my office with the Find My iPhone app, you
watch the bubble move, it makes me feel like I can see her.

They have GPS on their phones and I haven’t looked into this, but there
is a need to have some way to track the kids. The school should support
an app of some kind, I bet there is one, I should look into it.


The students interviewed said they were happy to have cell phones, and
many said they had “asked for them,” although most admitted that it
was to “play on them” or to “text their friends.” However, students also
said that they felt more comfortable knowing that they had a cell phone
“in case of an emergency” and to “know who to call” if something happened. 
Although some students were “frustrated” at how often they had
to check in with their parents, most found it fair, given that their parents 
had purchased their phone. Despite their being required to check
in, many commented that they often forgot to let their parents know
where they were. Students also described the consequences for not telling 
their parents where they were, although they seemed to understand
their parents’ desire to be informed of their location.
I have to check in, it’s fine, I mean they got me the phone.
If I forget to call my mom, even like once, my dad gets scared and nervous, 
and like calls and calls. I’ve been trying to stay on that because
then I lose privileges of hanging out with my friends.

She tracks my phone, with the Find My iPhone app, I don’t care that she
does or know when she does it, but she told me so I just try to behave.

Gender Differences

In Stanhope and Franklin Township, the parents of girls said that their
child’s gender influenced their active travel concerns, even if their
daughter was not the child interviewed. Parents thought that girls,
even when they traveled in groups, were more likely to be picked up
or harassed than groups of boys or mixed gender groups. Parents often
said they worried about their children walking or bicycling “because
they were girls” and were particularly concerned about sexual predators 
that targeted girls. One parent was not sure that her child “as a
girl . . . should be out for that long” in reference to the mile-long walk
home from middle school. Although the parents interviewed did not
specifically indicate that they set different rules for daughters than
sons, the child’s gender came up in several conversations as a reason
that parents were not comfortable with their child walking, or as part
of the reason that the child did not walk to or from school.

She’d be a girl in the middle of the road alone. I don’t know who’s in
the neighborhood, who is going to grab my child, what stray animals
there are, what people are driving crazy, just no.

I envision them pulling her into the car, she’s a little girl and she hangs
out with giddy little girls, they are tiny things with little legs and they
are too vulnerable, I don’t know if she could take care of herself.

I’m worried about like perverts jumping out, though I’m concerned
about people picking up the girls, like my daughter.
They’re still girls, maybe I’m sexist, I guess, but even a group of girls,
I don’t know. My son is a junior, he can walk them, there are seedy
people.

The responses from parents in Stanhope and Franklin Township were
much more alike than they were to the responses from the parents in
Highland Park, particularly with respect to stranger danger. Parents 
and students in Highland Park were more apt to describe traffic 
rather than any other factor as a barrier to walking or cycling.
The similarity prevailed between the responses in Stanhope and
Franklin Township, despite the fact that the parents and students in
Stanhope, like their counter­parts in Highland Park, described their

communities as places where “everyone knows each other,” and
“people look out for one another.” By contrast, parents and students
in Franklin Township described the community more in terms of its
“convenient location” and “affordability.”
Highland Park is known for its grid system, walking community,
and higher residential density. In addition, the socioeconomic environment 
may have influenced the perceptions of the parents interviewed. 
Several Highland Park parents mentioned that they moved
to the borough specifically to be able to complete more tasks on foot,
whereas no Franklin Township or Stanhope resident mentioned a
walkable environment. Although perceptions varied on the basis of
the context of each of the individual locations, the variation may have
revealed several ways to improve interventions to increase walking 
and bicycling. Community context and perceptions should be
examined before implementation of interventions to increase active
travel to and from school.

Implications

Investigators should continue to use qualitative methods such as interviews 
to talk directly with community members of all ages about how
they perceive their environment, given the variation of parent and student 
responses. A one-size-fits-all approach to increase active travel
is unlikely to be effective, whereas the discussion of community contexts, 
desires, and needs may lead to possible interventions. Qualitative 
methods also should be used as descriptive information-gathering
techniques to inform future surveys and quantitative initiatives. Lastly,
community members may become more empowered to make changes
through their engagement in participatory research. Throughout this
research, many participants felt passionately about their perspectives,
thanked the interviewers for asking them about important community
issues, and stated their desire for improvements.

Limitations

Limitations arose through participant selection, particularly because
the sampling had its basis in convenience and snowball sampling,
in which parents suggested additional interviewees for the study.

Although this technique helped to achieve larger numbers, interviewees 
shared traits that made the sample unrepresentative, which is common 
in qualitative methods. Despite this defect, the research may have
revealed an in-depth perspective of the social network interviewed,
particularly in Stanhope, where the most snowball sampling occurred.
In addition, the participants were not representative of their communities 
with respect to their gender, educational, or racial backgrounds.
Only women were interviewed in Stanhope, and they constituted
a majority of those interviewed in Highland Park, where white
participants were overrepresented. The selected communities comprised 
largely middle-class residents, and thus the study participants
were largely middle class. These participants’ views may not have
reflected the concerns of lower-income communities.
Despite these limitations, interviewees met two purposeful inclusion 
criteria, which were that (a) participants had common geographies
and (b) included children of a similar age. In addition, the study
was designed to elicit perceptions and was descriptive in nature.
Individuals’ perceptions were not used to generalize their specific
concerns or rationales to the community at large or to other communities. 
Instead, the study demonstrated the importance of context
when potential investment in interventions to improve active travel
is under consideration.
Compensation for participation in the interviews also varied across
the three towns. Participants in Highland Park were not compensated.
Participants in Franklin Township and Stanhope received $20 cash as
funding became available and because recruitment was more difficult.
Qualitative methods allow for detailed descriptions, in addition to
follow-up and the time and ability to ask interviewees for justifications 
and rationales for their perceptions. These methods are more
prone, however, to social desirability bias. During the interviews,
some parents seemed to quickly inform the interviewer about the
benefits of walking or the high level of concern they had for their
child’s safety, perhaps because they thought that was what the interviewers
would want to hear or to demonstrate that they were good
parents. Despite that possibility, in each town the social desirability
seemed to range from a discussion of health and the environment
in Highland Park to one of the safety and protection of students in
Stanhope.

Future Research

Future research should include direct talks with students about their
travel experiences. Examination of more parent and student perceptions 
through interviews in a single community prepared to make
planning and policy changes may enhance the usefulness of the findings 
for school districts and municipalities. The impact that student
perceptions have on mode choices remains unclear. To understand
these perceptions and the ideas students may have for improvements,
both as active travel users (often without their parents present) and
as the leaders of the future, may help to better shape active travel
interventions.
In this research, students were consistently knowledgeable and
engaged about their own safety concerns. This finding was consistent 
with the findings of the limited earlier qualitative work
with middle school children. The authors of another study, which
included interviews of students stated, “when given a chance, children 
are more than capable of forming and expressing their thoughts
about the issues pertaining to the planning and design of their everyday 
surroundings” (17). The empowerment of students to have a
voice and meaningful involvement in planning, programs, and projects 
is critical to the successful implementation and ownership of
initiatives. As researchers continue to encourage the use of qualitative 
methods in future research, they will discover more about what
children think of their environment and what improvements they seek
to make them feel safer. In turn, this research can improve interventions 
to encourage children to participate in healthy behaviors, such
as active travel, in the future.

Takeaway for Practice

The findings of this research have implications not only for researchers 
who examine the perceptions of parents and children but also
for schools and municipalities. Communities that seek to encourage
the number of students who use active travel may want to consider
hosting Walk to School and Walk from School days, given the variations 
that parents and children see in the two trips. Encouragement
of active travel both to and from school and sponsorship of events
in both directions would likely involve more students, who might
arrive by vehicle but want to walk home. Given the different perceptions 
that parents and students had of trips to and from school, specific 
efforts made to encourage children to walk home from school
might increase participation in active travel overall. The walk home,
which was perceived as the easier and more fun trip of the two,
might also act as a catalyst to encourage walking to school and the
formation of active travel patterns in the future.
In addition, programs and skills-based education to address and
build independence through the teaching of appropriate traffic and
crime safety rules can alleviate anxiety and concerns about walking
or bicycling in local environments. One way to address fear is to
educate and prepare students about what to do in a potentially bad
situation and how to stay safe. Children can be empowered through
opportunities to practice and role-play traffic safety skills in contexts
that are relevant to their lives.
Cell phones may facilitate active travel and enable parents to feel
more comfortable about allowing their children to walk or bicycle
to or from school. However, as earlier research has demonstrated,
parental overinvolvement can lead to higher levels of depression
and lower levels of perceived competence in children (18). Thus a
balance may need to be considered so that parents feel comfortable
allowing their children to walk or bicycle without constant super­vision
(either in person or through technology) to avoid these related negative 
impacts. Such a balance may mean that children text or call when
they arrive home, and parents do not indulge the desire to watch their
children wirelessly, speak with their children during the entirety of
the trip, or ask their children to call at the beginning, middle, and
end of their trips, all of which several participants in these interviews
reported doing.
In the current research, students were much more likely to state
that their active travel concerns had their basis in local or personal
experience, while parents were more likely to state that their concerns
arose from what they had read in books or learned in the media. Thus
parents were much more likely to be concerned about abductions and
sexual offenders than were students, who were more worried about
traffic incidents. Students were more likely to report that knowing
people along their route, knowing where to go if something happened,
and their having “eyes on the street” made them feel confident about
being able to make their trip to or from school safely. Parents, schools,
and municipalities should help students identify safe areas to go to if a
problem does arise. These sites might include certain local businesses,
in addition to the more well-identified police and fire stations.

In this research, students and parents all considered it safer to walk
in groups than to walk alone. However, many parents and students

reported they were unaware of neighbors that also walked to school.

Schools can help facilitate walking in groups by providing, on their
websites, common routes that students take to and from school and
by identifying meet-up locations. The schools could even specify
times in the morning to arrive at such locations. Students who would
be coming from different directions could meet at these locations

and walk the rest of the way together. Students also could use these
locations as departure points to walk part of the way home with
neighbors in the afternoon. School webpages also could provide
some education on the benefits of walking to school, particularly of
walking with neighbors. Although so-called Walking School Buses
often serve this function for younger students, the middle school
students in this study reported that they did not want to walk with
their parents. Thus the development of a meet-up location might be
a viable adaptation for use by middle school students.
