School travel behaviour in the Netherlands and Flanders

Studies on school travelling frequently deal with active travelling that is considered important in
preventing obesity. Most research has been done in low bicycle countries where walking is the main
active mode. The paper presents an analysis for the Netherlands and Flanders, two European countries
with high bicycle use. The study analyses two aspects of school travel behaviour: home-to-school
distances and modal choice. Both are analysed for primary and secondary school students. A descriptive
analysis learns that in Flanders trip lengths to primary schools are signi<U+FB01>cantly larger than in the
Netherlands and that the bicycle is more frequently used in the Netherlands. Analyses of in<U+FB02>uencing
variables for both home-to-school distance and modal choice demonstrate that ‘hard’ factors that
de<U+FB01>ne the objective conditions for school choice (crucial for home-to-school distance) and modal
choice are most in<U+FB02>uential. They regard the locations of eligible schools and the qualities of the eligible
modes. Just one other factor is signi<U+FB01>cant in the explanation of home-to-school distances: car
ownership. On the other hand, modal choice is in<U+FB02>uenced by several other socio-cultural factors,
where age of the pupil, size of the household, and car ownership are most important. Most outcomes
are in line with other studies. The observed high bicycle use demonstrates that the bicycle has the
potential to account for a large number of trips and can even be the dominant mode in school travelling.

1. Introduction                                                                          
											
School travelling is relatively undeveloped in transport                            
research, especially when compared with commuting to work.                                   
The reason might be that school travelling contributes little to the                     
most envisaged transport problems: car congestion and air                                
pollution. School travel has a modest share—according to the                             
Dutch NTS, 9% of all trips and 5.5% of all trip kilometres have the                      
purpose ‘education’—and its contribution to car-related problems                        
is small. In the Netherlands ca 2% of car kilometres are made for                        
education, though in less bicycle oriented countries the share can                       
be considerably higher. Still, there are reasons why school travel                           
should have a more prominent position in transport research.                             
First, pupils are in the learning phase of their lives and travelling                    
to school can contribute to the growth to maturity, especially                           
when they are trained to travel independently. Second, school                            
travel generates its own problems. Most important is traf<U+FB01>c                              
safety: younger pupils are playful and sometimes do not have                            
an eye for the dangers of traf<U+FB01>c. This problem is aggravated by                          
car congestion at school locations caused by parents who take                            
their children by car to school and back to home. Third, active                          
											
travelling by pupils is healthy and contributes to preventing
obesity. The latter argument is the most important motivation
for current research in this <U+FB01>eld.
School travel behaviour is mainly the outcome of two choices
that are made by the pupils or their parents: choice of the school
from all eligible schools and choice of the mode(s) for travelling
to school. We mean with choice of a ‘‘school’’ the combined
choices of a school as institution and of a speci<U+FB01>c location of the
institution; one institution may offer training at different locations. 
A hypothetical process of school choice and modal choice is
displayed in Fig. 1.
School choice is the outcome of the distance to the nearest
eligible schools and the selectiveness in school choice. The
assumption is that parents will in principal choose the nearest
school for their children but may decide for a more distant school
if it has a higher quality in some respects. Whether or not to
choose a more distant and better school depends on the importance 
that is attached to a high quality of the school. This
is indicated in the diagram as selectiveness in school choice.
Selectiveness may be associated with personal and household
characteristics; one can hypothesise for instance that parents that
are highly educated by themselves are more inclined to choose a
good school for their children. The distance to the nearest eligible
school depends on (a) ‘‘school location factors’’, that are factors
that de<U+FB01>ne the locations of the schools and the school density in

the area where a pupil lives, and (b) characteristics of the pupil
that are related to the type of education and hence which schools
are eligible. Most important characteristic is the pupils age.
Choice of the school determines the distance that a pupil has
to travel, given the home location. The distance affects the modal
qualities for the trip. Walking is a feasible mode for just short
distance trips while motorised modes are good options for longer
distances. Modal qualities and preferences of the parents or
pupils—that may relate to personal and household characteristics—
de<U+FB01>ne the modal choice.
The choices result partly from preferences of the households
regarding school quality or modal use, and partly from factors
that are given for them and that de<U+FB01>ne the objective conditions of
their choices. The latter regard the locations of the eligible schools
and the general qualities of the modes. Such factors depend on
decisions on a political level. Policies can in<U+FB02>uence the spatial
densities and locations of schools of several types and thus the
distances to eligible schools for pupils living at a certain location
and participating in a certain type of education. Likewise, political
choices can affect the service levels of modes, for instance by
investing in bicycle infrastructure, or providing dedicated bus
transport. In the paper, we indicate the factors that are given for
the households and only can be in<U+FB02>uenced by policies as ‘hard’
factors, and the preferences of the households as ‘soft’ factors.
This paper concentrates on the two mobility components of
school travelling: the home-to-school distance—that is a direct
result from school choice—and the modal split that results from
modal choice. These components are likely to differ by school
level and country. Different school levels generally go together
with different school densities and accordingly with different
average home-to-school distances. In different countries policies
regarding school locations and modal qualities can differ, and the
inhabitants may have different habits and cultures leading to
different travel choices. The paper describes and analyses the two
components for both primary and secondary education in two
European neighbouring countries, the Netherlands and Flanders1.
Section 2 gives a literature overview and background to the
study. Section 3 deals with the data sources and the way these are
used for the analyses. Section 4 gives a description of hometoschool 
distances and modal splits in the two countries for both
primary and secondary education. In Section 5 the in<U+FB02>uence of
explanatory variables on distances and mode choice is analysed.
Some conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

2. Literature review and background

There is little research on school choice as an explaining factor
for home-to-school distances. Gorard (1999) summarises the

schools being imposed by the Dutch King William I in the whole country,
including the predominantly Roman-Catholic Belgian area.

results of a number of studies on the choice of a secondary school
in the UK, where school choice is (within limits) free. A large
number of explanatory factors are de<U+FB01>ned. He categorises these
into <U+FB01>ve groups: academic (level of education), situational (convenience 
criteria like proximity to home and having friends in the
same school), organisational (school management, size, rules
like wearing a uniform), selective (gender, religion, ability), and
security (safety and welfare of the child at school, discipline).
The different studies reviewed by Gorard give no unambiguous
evidence about the relative importance of the different factors.
A few Dutch studies give information about the choice of a
primary school. They show that the most important variables
for primary school choice are accessibility (in particular by foot),
quality of the school, and religious orientation (Herweijer and
Vogels, 2004; Boer and Blijie, 2006). De Boer and Blijie found that
two accessibility aspects play a signi<U+FB01>cant role: distance and
number of traf<U+FB01>c barriers on the route. The assessment of the
different variables is dependent on income.
More research has been done on modal choice of pupils
travelling to school, in particular in North America and Australia;
see the comprehensive review of studies by Sirard and Slater,
2008. The smaller number of European studies is concentrated in
the UK. The focus is on the question how active travelling can be
promoted. The share of active modes (walking and cycling)
decreased signi<U+FB01>cantly in the past (see McDonald (2007) for the
US, Black et al. (2001) for the UK) while active travelling is
considered important in preventing obesity. In Europe more
sustainable transportation is put forward as an additional argument. 
The studies demonstrate that a large number of factors of
varying natures have or can have signi<U+FB01>cant in<U+FB02>uences on modal
choice. Many studies indicate home-to-school distance as the
most important variable or one of the most important variables
(DiGuiseppi et al., 1998; Black et al., 2001; Granville et al., 2002;
Dellinger and Staunton, 2002; Mitra et al., 2010; He, 2011).
The distance analysis in the present paper is then relevant for
modal choice; factors in<U+FB02>uencing distance will affect indirectly
modal choice. More reported variables regard, among others,
urban form (McMillan, 2007; Mitra et al., 2010), (perceived)
safety or security of the route to school (DiGuiseppi et al., 1998;
McMillan, 2007; McDonald et al., 2010), transportation options
of the household (DiGuiseppi et al., 1998; Black et al., 2001; He,
2011), ethnicity (He, 2011), age of the child (McDonald, 2007),
and gender of the child. Results on gender are ambiguous: studies
in the US <U+FB01>nd that boys are more inclined to use active modes
than girls (McMillan et al., 2006; He, 2011) while in Japan a
higher car dependence is observed for boys (Susilo and Waygood,
2012). The gender differences in the US are associated with social
control on the route (McDonald et al., 2010). A Dutch study
uncovers season as a signi<U+FB01>cant factor (Boer et al., 1992); this
variable is seldom included in other studies.
North America, Australia, and the UK, where the mainstream
of the research has been conducted, belong to the countries with
the lowest bicycle use (Pucher and Buehler, 2008). Active travelling 
in these countries is mainly walking. However, in some other
countries the bicycle has a much more important role and can
even be the dominant mode in home-to-school travelling (Boer
and Goeverden, 2007). The large differences in bicycle use can be
explained by different travel conditions like the presence of
dedicated bicycle infrastructure, <U+FB02>atness of the route, and provision 
of dedicated school bus transport. However, socio-cultural
factors are likely to play a role as well, as was demonstrated for
the USA by Handy et al. (2010) and for Germany by Scheiner and
Holz-Rau (2007).
The analyses for the Netherlands and Flanders in this paper
regard two countries with a bicycle culture. In this respect the
study differs from most other studies. The analyses may indicate

to which extent results from particularly modal choice studies in
countries with low bicycle use are valid in countries with a clear
bicycle culture. The Netherlands and Flanders are comparable
in several respects: they have freedom of school choice and a
competitive school system with religious and nonreligious
schools; the overall population density is similar; the surface is
mainly <U+FB02>at in both countries; provision of school transport is
comparable; and both countries have a cycling culture (Boer,
2010). Supply of public transport is comparable as well; in both
countries regular hourly or more frequent bus and rail services
are provided in daytime, where the buses serve nearly all
settlements with over 1000 inhabitants. There are some differences 
as well. Unlike Flanders, the Netherlands have traditionally
a strict policy in concentrating new residential developments in
or around the existing settlements. As a result residential land use
is more concentrated in the Netherlands implying higher population 
densities inside the residential areas. This might affect
distances to eligible schools. The latter are also affected by differences 
in school densities, where in the Netherlands the density
of primary schools is higher and in Flanders that of secondary
schools; see Table 1 for density <U+FB01>gures. Finally, the Netherlands
have more and better dedicated bicycle infrastructure than
Flanders. This might affect modal choice.

3. Data used for the analysis

The analyses are based on data from the Dutch and Flemish
national travel surveys: the Dutch ‘Mobiliteitsonderzoek Nederland’ 
(Dutch MON, 2011) and the Flemish ‘Onderzoek Verplaatsingsgedrag’ 
(Flemish OVG, 2011). The two most recent surveys of
each country that were available at the time of the analysis are
explored. The Dutch data regard the years 2008 and 2009, the
Flemish data cover the period September 2007–September 2009.
The organisation of the surveys in the two countries is slightly
different. In the Dutch survey a sample of households is selected
and the members of these households are asked about their trips
on a certain day. In the Flemish survey individual persons are
selected and asked about their trips on a certain day. The surveys
record data on leg, trip, person, and household level. In the
Flemish survey that includes data of only one member of a
household, additionally some characteristics of the head of the
family are asked for. For the modal choice analyses in Section 5
we add the observations of the older Flemish OVG from 2000 to
the analysed data in order to have suf<U+FB01>cient observations. The
2000-survey was organised on household level just like the Dutch
MON-survey.
Both in the MON- and the OVG-surveys no clear instructions
are given about the person who has to complete the forms for
younger children. In the explanation to the MON-forms respondents 
are instructed to answer the questions as far as they are

able to do so. The OVG-explanation states that parents are
allowed to help their children in completing the forms.
For the analyses only the data of the <U+FB01>rst observed home-to-school 
or school-to-home trips of each pupil are used. Selection
of just the <U+FB01>rst observed commuting trip has implications for
both travel distances and modal splits. Travel distances would be
slightly smaller if all commuting trips were included in the
analysis, because pupils are inclined to travel more frequently
between home and school when distances are shorter, especially
for having lunch at home. There is also an implication for modal
choice which is due to the fact that a large majority of the selected
trips are home-to-school trips. These trips have in primary
education a slightly higher proportion of chauffeured children
than school-to-home trips (2% difference in the Netherlands, 6% in
Flanders). Wong et al. (2011) report similar <U+FB01>ndings for Canada.
The analyses are based on the reported distances by the
respondents, not on estimated true distances. The surveys do
not provide suf<U+FB01>cient information for an accurate estimation.
Hendrikx and Moritz (1990) compared registered trip distances in
the Dutch NTS with true distances and found that generally very
short distances ( o1 km) are underestimated (20–40% depending
on mode; 40% regards car drivers) and that longer distances are
somewhat overestimated (0–15%).
A distinction will be made between primary and secondary
education, because travel behaviour is likely to be different. However, 
information about the school level of the responding pupils is
lacking in the surveys. We assume that each pupil visits the kind of
school that he/she would visit in the normal situation, that is, if he/
she does not repeat or skip a year at primary school. For the Dutch
pupils, those aged 5–11 are assumed to visit primary schools and
those aged 13–17 are assumed to visit secondary schools. Pupils of
12 years old cannot be assigned unambiguously to one type of
education and are left out from the analyses. The Flemish data that
include year of birth, allow de<U+FB01>ning the type of education in the
normal situation for each responding pupil. A pupil is assumed to
participate in primary education if the difference between the year of
observation and the year of birth is less than 12, or if the difference is
equal to 12 and the observation is made in the <U+FB01>rst half of the year
before the summer holiday. Otherwise secondary education is
assumed. It can be calculated from Dutch and Flemish statistics
(http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb and http://www.ond.vlaanderen.be/
onderwijsstatistieken) that the assumptions match well with the
real participation in primary and secondary education. The mismatch
is 0.17% for the Dutch primary group, 0.6% for the Dutch secondary,
0.2% for the Flemish primary and 2.0% for the Flemish secondary.

4. School travel characteristics in the Netherlands and
Flanders

This section gives some descriptive <U+FB01>gures regarding distances
travelled to school and modal splits in school trips. These

inform about actual travel behaviour and may be helpful for the                                                    
interpretation of the results of the analysis of the in<U+FB02>uence of                                                  
explanatory variables in Section 5.                                                                                  

4.1. Home-to-school distances                                                                                        

Primary schools are widespread and are present in many                                                           
smaller settlements. Therefore, home-to-school distances in primary 
education might be expected to be generally short, less than
5 km. Yet some pupils in the age of 5–11 may be faced with
(substantially) larger distances, particularly when they visit
special schools or when they opt for either education of a speci<U+FB01>c                                                          
denomination like Roman Catholic, or of a distinct approach like                                                              
Montessori. Secondary education is provided predominantly in   
the cities that function as regional or higher-level centre. They
Fig. 3. Modal split in home-to-school trips in the Netherlands (NL) and
serve mostly areas in the order of 15 km around the city. ThereFlanders (FL).
fore, distances to secondary schools are likely to be signi<U+FB01>cantly
larger than those to primary schools.
The expectations regarding differences between distances to                                                     
primary and secondary schools are con<U+FB01>rmed by Fig. 2. The <U+FB01>gure                                                 
includes two graphs that show the cumulative frequency distributions 
of home-to-school distances for Dutch and Flemish                                                     
pupils in the primary and the secondary school age. The distances                                                
underlying the graphs are the reported distances by the survey                                                   
respondents.                                                                                                     
The distributions of travel distances for pupils in the primary                                              
school age (left graph) differ substantially between the Netherlands 
and Flanders. Flemish pupils travel longer distances, on
average nearly 2 times longer than the Dutch (3.6 km versus                                                      
2.0 km). Possible explanations are differences in the distances to
be travelled to the nearest school and differences in the selectiveness 
of parents in choosing a school for their children. Larger                                              
distances to the nearest school in Flanders are likely because of                                                
the lower population density in residential areas (Table 1). Selectiveness 
in school choice is more conspicuous in Flanders; parents                                               
have the opportunity to register their children on speci<U+FB01>c days                                                  
and the media show on these days hundreds of ambitious parents                                                   
queuing for popular schools.                                                                                     
The two distance curves to secondary schools (right graph)                                                   
show larger distances for the Flemish pupils as well, though the                                                 
relative difference between the curves is smaller than in the case                                               
of primary schools. The average distances are 6.9 km and 8.3 km                                                      
for the Dutch and Flemish respectively. The longer distances for                                                 
the Flemish pupils are remarkable because the density of secondary 
schools is higher in Flanders (Table 1). Possibly, the differences 
in residential densities play here a role as well. Other                                                   
possible explanations are a higher spatial concentration of secondary 
schools in Flanders and a more selective school choice by                                                 
Flemish parents or students.                                                                                     


Comparison of the observed distances with older data demonstrates
one signi<U+FB01>cant change: the distances travelled by Flemish
pupils to primary schools increased by about 50% between 1994
and 2008 (Goeverden and Boer, 2010). This increase can only to a
small extent be explained by spatial developments; residential
densities are slowly decreasing (by 4% between 2002 and 2008).
The impression is that Flemish parents have become more
selective in choosing primary schools.

4.2. Modal split

Modal choice is dependent on the relative quality of the
available travel modes. These qualities are strongly related to
distance. Walking is a feasible mode for just short distance trips
while public transport is primarily an option for longer distances.
The importance of distance is demonstrated in many studies (see
Section 2). Therefore, for the modal split and modal choice
analyses two distance classes are distinguished, short and long
distances ( r3 km and 43 km respectively). A trip distance of
3 km is about the maximum that is observed for walking trips and
is also close to the point where a positive correlation between
distance and bicycle use turns into a negative correlation.
The mode of a trip is de<U+FB01>ned as the main mode. In multimodal
trips this is the mode that is used for the longest leg of the
trip. The modal splits are displayed in Fig. 3. The observation
numbers are large; they range from 114 for the Flemish in
the primary school age travelling 43 km to 3639 for the Dutch
in the primary school age travelling r 3 km. Collective transport
(CT) in the <U+FB01>gure includes both public transport and dedicated
school transport.

The <U+FB01>gure shows large differences in modal splits. Dutch
pupils are more inclined to travel by bike, while Flemish pupils
more frequently are carried by car and use public transport.
Remarkable results are that, in contrast to the Netherlands, in
Flanders (a) only few pupils younger than 12 will use the bicycle
for longer distances, and (b) it is rather common to drive pupils in
the secondary school age to school by car. The general impression
is that Dutch pupils travel more independently to school than
Flemish pupils.

5. Analysis of in<U+FB02>uencing variables

This section explores which variables explain signi<U+FB01>cantly the
home-to-school distance and the modal choice in travelling to
school. The analysis should clarify to which extent choices
are determined by hard and soft factors. Hard factors de<U+FB01>ne
the objective choice conditions by pupils or parents. These are
the locations of eligible schools for explaining distance and the
availability and quality of travel modes for explaining modal
choice. Soft factors regard characteristics of the pupils, their
parents or the household. By comparing two countries with their
own traditions and preferences, the in<U+FB02>uence of nationality can
be assessed as well.
Generally, the data have a limited quality in describing the
hard factors. There is no information about which schools are
eligible for individual pupils, and data about modal qualities for
individual trips are not available as well. Such factors can only be
roughly approached by correlating variables. On the other hand,
the data are well-suited to analyse the in<U+FB02>uence of soft factors.

5.1. Factors affecting home-to-school distances

The distance that a pupil has to cover is directly related to the
choice of a school from the set of eligible schools. Which schools
are eligible for a pupil depends on school level, type of education,
preferences regarding religious denomination, etc. Apart from
these, the distance to a school should not be too large. The data
give no direct information about which schools are eligible for the
responding pupils. However, some variables correlate with factors
that de<U+FB01>ne the distances to eligible schools and give the opportunity 
to include a rough description of these distances in the
model. These variables are:

Population density of the living environment. Distances may
be larger when pupils are living in less densely populated
areas. If the population density is low, the school density
generally is low as well, particularly in secondary education.
The population density is indicated by two variables: province
and degree of urbanisation of the home municipality.
In particularly the Netherlands most provinces can be characterised 
as either mainly rural or highly urbanised.
  Importance of the city where the school is located. Generally,
school types with low densities are only located in the more

important cities and require travelling on relatively large
distances. This variable is indicated by the degree of urbanisation 
of the school municipality.
  Age of the pupil. As mentioned in Section 3, age enables us to

make an accurate assignment to primary or secondary education. 
More in general, older pupils will have to travel larger
distances because they participate in higher level education

that is connected with a lower density of school locations.
  Gender. Boys have more frequently special needs and they are
participating to a higher extent in special education than girls
are. The ratios are about 2.5:1 for the Netherlands and 1.7:1 for

Flanders; the ratios are similar for primary and secondary
education (http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb and http://www.ond.
vlaanderen.be/onderwijsstatistieken). Because the density of
special education facilities is very low compared to the normal
school density, boys will on average have to travel larger
distances.

These variables can be considered as hard variables. They
determine partly the ‘choice set’ of schools and related distances
to home. One should note that age and gender may also have soft
impacts that are independent from the relation with school type.
Age will be affected when parents are not satis<U+FB01>ed with the
initially selected school and look for another school during the
course. In the case of gender, parents might be more worried
about their daughters’ exposure to traf<U+FB01>c or insecurity than about
that of their sons. Then they will be more inclined to choose the
nearest school for girls than for boys.
In addition, one may hypothesise that the following soft
variables affect home-to-school distances at given choice sets,
by affecting either selectiveness in school choice or the in<U+FB02>uence
of distance:

 Education level of the parents. Parents with higher education
levels may be more selective in school choice.
 Household income. A higher income might both increase selectiveness 
in school choice and lower the resistance of distance.
 Religious orientation. Parents who prefer education of a
certain religious denomination for their children will be more
selective in school choice.
  Size of the household. The more children are visiting schools,
the more dif<U+FB01>cult is organising transport to distant schools.
  Car ownership of the household. Higher car ownership increases
the opportunity to choose a more distant school.
Car ownership or drivers’ licence of the students themselves
have no relevance because at the selected ages (under 18)
children are not permitted to drive a car.

The data give information about all of the listed soft variables
except for religious orientation. Therefore, the in<U+FB02>uence of this
variable will not be analysed. The variable ‘education level of the
parents’ is represented by the education of the highest educated
responding parent in the Dutch MON-databases that principally
include information about all household members, and by the
education of the head of the family in the Flemish OVG.
The in<U+FB02>uence of the variables is examined simultaneously
using the Structural Equations Modelling package AMOS 20.
Several model speci<U+FB01>cations are tested: models with one endogenous 
variable (distance) and models where some of the initially
exogenous variables are made endogenous by giving them an
intermediate function between (some of) the other exogenous

variables and the distance variable. The variables that are made
endogenous are the two urbanisation variables and car ownership. 
The reasons are (a) observed strong correlations between
these variables and most of the other exogenous variables, and (b)
the theoretical notion that the urbanisation of the home municipality 
and car ownership are the result of choices (the choice
where to live and the choice to buy one or more cars) where a
relation with other personal and household characteristics might
be hypothesised. The models with more endogenous variables
prove to perform much better for each group than the simple
model with one endogenous variable. Therefore, we choose the
former for the de<U+FB01>nite analyses.
Fig. 4 displays a diagram with the general speci<U+FB01>cation of the
model. The intermediate variable ‘car ownership’ is hypothesised
to be in<U+FB02>uenced only by person and household characteristics;
the urbanisation of the home municipality is hypothesised to be
in<U+FB02>uenced by both person/household characteristics and school
location factors (other than the municipal urbanisations; in this
study these ‘factors’ stand for just one variable, the province of
the home address). A special case is the urbanisation of the school
municipality. This variable is in fact an outcome of the school
choice and no input, just like the distance. However, inclusion in
the model improves the <U+FB01>t and shows a strong and highly
signi<U+FB01>cant in<U+FB02>uence on the distance for all groups. Besides, it is
highly correlated with the urbanisation of the home municipality,
in particular in primary education where home and school usually
are located in the same municipality. Therefore, we included the
variable as intermediate variable between urbanisation of the
home municipality and the distance. Based on strong correlations
with the province of the home address, we made it dependent on
this variable as well. Finally, we included a variable ‘year’ in the
model. This variable re<U+FB02>ects the year of the survey and is added in
order to neutralise possible impacts of time. It is de<U+FB01>ned as the
year of the survey minus 2000.
To <U+FB01>nd out whether groups behave differently, AMOS produces
results for both unconstrained and constrained models. In the
unconstrained models the parameters are estimated for each
group separately (Dutch primary, Dutch secondary, Flemish
primary, Flemish secondary) and the coef<U+FB01>cient of a variable
can have different values for different groups. In constrained
models, some restrictions are imposed on the parameters,
increasing the number of degrees of freedom. A restriction can
be that an explanatory variable has the same coef<U+FB01>cient for each
group. If a constrained model has a better <U+FB01>t than the unconstrained 
model, the former should be preferred and groups might
not differ signi<U+FB01>cantly.
The constrained models where equal values are imposed on
the coef<U+FB01>cients for all four groups perform worse than the
unconstrained models. This is not surprising, considering that
the distribution of the distance—the dependent variable—differs
largely between primary and secondary education. However, if
only the coef<U+FB01>cients of the group pairs with the same education
level are assumed to be equal, the constrained models perform
best. Table 2 shows indications of the <U+FB01>t for the unconstrained
and two types of constrained models for both primary and
secondary education. The analysed constrained models are the

structural weights model where the coef<U+FB01>cients of the explanatory 
variables are set equal, and the structural intercepts model
where in addition the intercepts are set equal.
The presented indications of the <U+FB01>t are the relative w2 (chisquare 
divided by the number of degrees of freedom), the root
mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), and the squared
multiple correlation (SMC) for the distance. For a good <U+FB01>t, the
relative w2 should preferably be lower than 2, and the RMSEA
lower than 0.05. The SMC indicates the proportion of the variance
of the dependent variable that is explained by the explanatory
variables in the model and should preferably be closer to 1 (100%
of the variance is explained) than to 0 (nothing is explained).
There are no marked differences between the different models
regarding their <U+FB01>t. The <U+FB01>t of each model is rather bad but not too
bad. The constrained models have a somewhat better <U+FB01>t than the
unconstrained, and within the constrained models the structural
weights models perform slightly better than the structural intercepts 
models. Before equalising the coef<U+FB01>cients of groups of the
two countries in the constrained models we harmonised the
variables that differ for the different countries. First we left the
provinces, that are typically connected to one country, out of the
model. In the unconstrained models the provinces have a signi<U+FB01>cant 
in<U+FB02>uence for mainly the group Dutch secondary where in
rural provinces the distances are longer than in the more
urbanised provinces. Second, we reclassi<U+FB01>ed the urbanisation
and income variables because they have different de<U+FB01>nitions in
(the data from) the two countries. We constructed an urbanisation 
variable with <U+FB01>ve classes that is comparable for both
countries, and de<U+FB01>ned an income variable with three classes that
has class limits that do not differ too much for the two countries.
Table 3 gives an overview of the analysed variables and observation 
numbers in the best performing constrained models where
the two primary age groups and the two secondary age groups are
combined.
The variables gender, income, and parental education are
treated in the analysis as categorical variables, the other variables
as continuous variables. If a variable is ordinal, one of the two
extreme classes is chosen as the reference class, in principle the
extreme with the largest number of observations. In order to
prevent unwanted impacts of outliers, only observations of
distances shorter than 40 km in the case of primary education
or shorter than 80 km in the case of secondary education are
analysed.
We used three estimation methods: maximum likelihood,
Bayesian estimation, and bootstrapping. Maximum likelihood
selects values of the parameters that produce a distribution that
gives the observed data the greatest probability. Bayesian estimation 
maximises the posterior expectation of a utility function.
Bootstrapping is a resampling method that can be used for any
distribution of the dependent variable. The three methods all
produced nearly the same coef<U+FB01>cients. The same is true for the
standard deviations produced by maximum likelihood and Bayesian 
estimation. The bootstrapping standard deviations sometimes 
differ signi<U+FB01>cantly from the others. We therefore present
only one estimate of the coef<U+FB01>cients (maximum likelihood) and
both the maximum likelihood (ML) and bootstrapping (BT)

estimates of the standard deviations and the critical ratios. The
critical ratios are de<U+FB01>ned as the ratios of estimated means and
standard errors and they are close to the t-values in large
samples.
Tables 4a and 4b show the estimation results of the structural 
weights model. The presented results are limited to the
explanation of the distance, the only dependent variable we are
interested in. Only the variables that are signi<U+FB01>cant on a 95% level
for the primary and secondary age groups are displayed. Initially
all variables were included in the model and then variables that
were not signi<U+FB01>cant on a 95% level were left out.
An interesting observation is that in both tables the intercepts
for the Dutch and Flemish do not differ signi<U+FB01>cantly, despite the
fact that the structural intercepts models have a slightly worse <U+FB01>t
than the structural weights models. If still the intercepts are
assumed to be equal, most results are close to those presented in
Tables 4. However, there is one remarkable difference: the year
variable in Table 4a is not signi<U+FB01>cant any more. Car ownership
and income become more signi<U+FB01>cant.
What can be concluded from the results of the analyses? First,
the observation that the constrained models perform better than
the unconstrained models suggests that nationality has no
important in<U+FB02>uence, at least with regard to the two studied
countries. Second, looking at the rather bad <U+FB01>t of the models
(Table 2), the explanatory variables make just a limited contribution 
to the explanation of the distance. One or more important
explanatory variables are missing. We hypothesise that the
distance to the nearest school is the most important missing
variable. In that case, the location of the schools relative to the
home locations is highly in<U+FB02>uencing on home-to-school distances.
Third, looking at the signi<U+FB01>cant variables in the model, both hard
and soft variables play an important role, though the hard seem to
dominate. Hard variables are in the context of Tables 4 the
variables that relate to the locations of eligible schools: the two
urbanisation variables, age and gender. Most in<U+FB02>uencing are the
degrees of urbanisation of the home and school municipalities;
these two variables are highly signi<U+FB01>cant in all models. Age of the
pupil is highly signi<U+FB01>cant as well, in particular in secondary
education. We hypothesise that the main reason is that at
increasing age students participate in higher level education that
is connected with a lower density of school locations, the ‘hard’
component of age. The in<U+FB02>uence of gender is in conformance with
the expectations based on the higher participation of boys in
special education. But a higher concern on the problems that girls
might experience during their trips might play a role as well.
The in<U+FB02>uences of the hard variables are all according to the
hypotheses.
Each of the other—soft—variables have signi<U+FB01>cant in<U+FB02>uences
for at least one group. Car ownership increases the distance in
both primary and secondary education. In primary education,
distances are relatively large in the lower income classes and in
large households. In secondary education, distances are relatively
large when the parental education is low. The in<U+FB02>uence of car
ownership is in conformance with the hypothesis, the in<U+FB02>uences
of income, household size, and parental education are unexpected. 
A possible explanation is that these variables are not fully
‘soft’ but have hard components that affect the distance reversely.
It may be hypothesised that pupils with special needs, that have
to travel relatively large distances, are overrepresented in large
households, households with low income, and households with
low educated parents.
The main conclusion is that the home-to-school distance is
predominantly explained by the hard variables. There is just one
soft variable with a clear in<U+FB02>uence: car ownership. Lowering the
resistance of distance by buying a car increases the distance
travelled. This observation indicates that there is some selectivity
Boer / Transport Policy 26 (2013) 73–84
in school choice. However, this selectivity is not clearly related to
the other investigated variables.

5.2. Factors affecting modal choice

The analysis of modal choice regards the choice of the main
mode of trips, de<U+FB01>ned as the mode that is used for the longest
leg in the case of multimodal trips. Modal choice can be
hypothesised to be in<U+FB02>uenced by modal attributes describing
the qualities of the separate modes (hard variables), and by
factors that in<U+FB02>uence mode choice via personal preferences (soft
variables). Data about modal attributes were not available and
could not be analysed. However, some available variables are
(strongly) related to modal qualities and might give an indication 
of their in<U+FB02>uences. These variables and their hypothesised
in<U+FB02>uences are:


 Distance. The longer the distance to school, the more competitive 
are the faster modes.
 Population density. In densely populated areas the quality of
public transport is usually high, while the traf<U+FB01>c conditions are
relatively unfavourable for using active modes and in particular 
for the bicycle for reasons of safety. Public transport
generally provides good services if the destination area is
highly urbanised; usage of the car is then more dif<U+FB01>cult, partly
because of parking problems.
  Weather. Bleak weather conditions will lower the probability
of the ‘outside’ modes walking and cycling and increase the
probability of car and PT use. Sabir (2011) found that in the
Netherlands temperature is the most in<U+FB02>uencing weather
variable on travel behaviour. The bicycle is the most sensitive
mode to weather conditions.

Variables that may in<U+FB02>uence mode choice via personal preferences are:


 Age. The older the pupil, the more independent he/she will be
in using travel modes.
 Gender. Girls may be travelling less independently than boys
because they are exposed to higher security risks.
 Education level of the parents. The higher the education of the
parents, the more they may be aware of the merits of
independent travelling by their children.
  Household income. High income facilitates travelling with the
relatively expensive motorised modes.
  Size of the household. The larger the number of school
visiting pupils, the lower the probability to be escorted by
the parents. When pupils travel together to the same school,
the need for escorting is smaller; when they travel to
different schools, escorting all pupils is more dif<U+FB01>cult to
practice. This hypothesis is in line with existing studies.
Weigand and McDonald (2011) observe that children of
larger families learn to travel without a parent in order to
simplify school commuting. Susilo and Waygood (2012) <U+FB01>nd
a negative relation between household size and car dependence of children.
  Ethnicity. In the Netherlands large differences in modal splits
between groups of different nationalities are found. A common
observation is that immigrants use the bicycle less frequently
than natives do (Harms, 2006). Differences in modal choice in
travelling to school can then be expected as well. In<U+FB02>uences of
ethnicity are also found in the US (He, 2011).
  Car ownership of the household. Higher car ownership will
increase the probability of car use.

The in<U+FB02>uences of all listed variables are investigated, except
for ethnicity. The survey data give no information about ethnicity
of the respondents. In contrast to the analysis in 5.1 population
density is represented by the published municipal degrees of
urbanisation that are de<U+FB01>ned differently in the two countries. For
the analyses of modal choice in longer distance trips ( 4 3 km)
the urbanisations of both the home and the school municipalities

are included in the model. In the case of short distance trips only
the urbanisation of the home municipality is included because
for this segment home and school are nearly always located in
the same municipality. Inclusion of the urbanisation degrees
of both municipalities would imply inclusion of two variables
that are extremely correlated. Weather is represented by
the period of the year. A distinction is made between cold
(December–February), moderate (March–April and October–
November) and hot (May–September).
For analysing modal choice by the Flemish pupils we
combined the databases of 2000 and 2008–2009 in order to
enlarge the number of observations. When using only the data
of 2008–2009 too many subcategory-mode combinations have no
observations. We hypothesise that the modal choice process will
not have changed signi<U+FB01>cantly in the period 2000–2009. The large
increase in average distance to primary schools should in principle 
not affect modal choice but only modal split. By including the
variable ‘year’ possible changes in modal choice can be detected.
The in<U+FB02>uences of the variables are examined simultaneously
using multinomial logistic regression (SPSS 16.0). The analyses

are performed separately for the two distance classes de<U+FB01>ned in
Section 4.2: r3 km and 43 km. The four groups (Dutch primary,
Dutch secondary Flemish primary, Flemish secondary) are
combined in the analyses, and dummy variables indicating
whether an observation belongs to a certain group are added to
the models. Observations with distances exceeding 150 km are
excluded. The analysed modes are walking, bicycle and car for the
short distances, and bicycle, car and collective transport for the
longer distances. The mode collective transport includes both
public transport and dedicated school bus transport. Excluded
modes have always few observation numbers, with one exception: 
Dutch pupils in the secondary school age that use the moped
for distances 4 3 km. This group has 86 observations, about as
many as those using the car. For comparability of the results for
the different segments as well as for different ages (only persons
aged 16 years and older are allowed to drive a moped), we
excluded this mode. Table 5 shows the observation numbers by
group, mode and distance class.
In the modal choice analyses most variables are treated as
categorical variables. The only continuous variables are distance,
age and year. Tables 6 and 7 show the results for the two distance
classes. Only variables/categories that are signi<U+FB01>cant on a 95%
level are included in the table. Signi<U+FB01>cance on a 99% level is
indicated by an asterisk.
The <U+FB01>gures in the two tables demonstrate that both the hard
variables describing modal qualities (distance, season and urbanisation) 
and the soft variables can be highly in<U+FB02>uential. Distance

is the most in<U+FB02>uencing variable. Increasing distance decreases the
probability of walking and increases both usage of car and CT
(collective transport). The other hard variables have signi<U+FB01>cant
in<U+FB02>uences as well. Increasing temperature increases the probability 
of cycling at the cost of both usage of car and CT. Increasing
urbanisation lowers the probability of cycling for short trips at the
bene<U+FB01>t of both walking and–except for the highest level of
urbanisation–car use. For longer trips, urbanisation generally
enlarges use of CT. There is one exception: the Dutch travelling
to primary schools and living in rural municipalities are relatively
inclined to use CT. The latter is the only <U+FB01>nding that is not
according to the hypotheses. In the group Dutch primary travelling 
longer distances, dedicated bus transport accounts for a large
part of collective transport and the hypothesised relation between
public transport and urbanisation might not be valid for dedicated 
bus transport.
Most of the soft variables have a larger or smaller signi<U+FB01>cant
in<U+FB02>uence as well. Increasing age increases the probability of
cycling at the cost of both walking and car use in primary
education. In the case of Dutch secondary, both usage of car and
CT increase with increasing age at the cost of the bicycle. Gender
has only an impact in Flanders. Boys are more likely to use the
bicycle for travelling to secondary schools at the cost of both car
and collective transport. Car ownership generally increases car
use and is bene<U+FB01>cial for the bicycle as well in the choices between
bicycle and both walking and CT. Income has few and sometimes
ambiguous impacts. Earning a low income is both favourable and

unfavourable for walking by the Flemish (in primary and secondary 
education respectively) and seems favourable for car use to
primary schools in the Netherlands. Increasing household size
increases walking at the cost of the bicycle and increases bicycle
use at the cost of the car. Parental education has only some
impacts on short distances. When the parents are higher educated, 
their children are more likely to use the bicycle unlike
walking in the case of Dutch primary and unlike car use in the
case of Flemish secondary.
A few <U+FB01>ndings are unexpected and opposite to the hypotheses.
The <U+FB01>rst is the observed decrease of the bicycle use at the bene<U+FB01>t
of car and CT at an increasing age for the Dutch travelling to
secondary schools on longer distances. Are Dutch teenagers more
devoted to a luxury lifestyle when they grow older? Or do they
take decisions less dependent from the parents who possibly
prefer cycling? Or should pupils that use the moped when they
are 16 or older otherwise have predominantly used the bicycle
rather than car or CT? Other unexpected results regard the
in<U+FB02>uences of income. Possibly, correlation with other variables
like education level of the parents affects the outcomes for the
income variable.
A remarkable additional result is that car use in trips to
secondary schools on longer distances by the Dutch has signi<U+FB01>cantly 
increased in the short period covered by the analysed data
(2008–2009). We add here that the in<U+FB02>uence of the year on the
choice between car and bicycle for the Flemish travelling to
primary schools is the reverse, but this in<U+FB02>uence is just not
signi<U+FB01>cant on a 95% level and is therefore not included in
the table.
The group dummy variables indicate that there are signi<U+FB01>cant
differences between the two levels of education and also between
the two countries. At short distances, car use is relatively high in
primary education. At longer distances, Dutch pupils are more
inclined to use collective transport when they travel to primary
schools, which is to a large extent dedicated bus transport for this
group. A clear difference between the two countries is that Dutch
pupils are more inclined than the Flemish to use the bicycle.
Flemish pupils more frequently use the car in primary education
and collective transport in secondary education.
The reported intercepts are the intercepts of the model where
the Flemish secondary are taken as the reference for the
group dummies. When choosing another reference, the intercept
changes. For this reason, the <U+FB01>ndings for the group dummies are
put in italics when Flemish secondary is not the reference.
A general conclusion is that the hard variables play a dominant
role. Most important is the distance. Still, many soft variables are
highly signi<U+FB01>cant as well. The signi<U+FB01>cant variables include nationality. 
The Dutch use more frequently the bicycle, the Flemish the
car and collective transport. However, a tendency of increasing
car use is observed for the Dutch pupils while the outcomes
suggest an opposite tendency for the Flemish pupils. Both
countries might slowly come closer to each other.

6. Conclusion and discussion

This paper analyses school travel behaviour in two countries
with high bicycle use: the Netherlands and Flanders. Educational
policies and geographical conditions are similar in the two
countries but there are differences in spatial concentration of
urban activities and in culture. Outstanding differences regarding
school travelling are that Flemish pupils travel substantially
larger distances to primary schools and that Dutch pupils use
the bicycle more frequently.
School travel behaviour has two important components: the
distance between home and school and the modal use. Both

components are mainly explained by ‘hard’ factors, that de<U+FB01>ne
the objective conditions for school choice or modal choice:
the locations of the eligible schools and the qualities of the
eligible modes respectively. The home-to-school distance itself
is the most important hard factor for explaining modal choice.
There are good opportunities for policy interventions because the
hard factors are the factors par excellence that can be in<U+FB02>uenced
by policy. If the objective is to increase the share of active modes,
both a school location policy that aims to shorten the distances to
the nearest school and an infrastructure policy that improves the
travel conditions for walking and cycling can be effective.
Other, socio-cultural factors, are less important. This is particularly 
true for the explanation of distances, where just one ‘soft’
variable has a clear signi<U+FB01>cant in<U+FB02>uence: car ownership. In the
case of modal choice several socio-cultural variables play a role.
Car ownership is again very important, other important variables
are size of the household and age of the pupil. Remarkably, gender
has a signi<U+FB01>cant in<U+FB02>uence in Flanders only; in the Netherlands
there is no trace of any impact. The Flemish <U+FB01>ndings that boys in
the secondary school age are more inclined to use the bicycle than
girls, are roughly comparable to <U+FB01>ndings in the US that with
seventh to twelfth grade travellers, boys use more active modes
and are less car dependent than girls (He, 2011). Most other
outcomes are in line with other studies as well.
An important additional conclusion from the study is that the
bicycle has the potential to account for a large number of trips
and can even be the dominant mode in school travelling.
Promoting cycling can be effective in increasing the share of
active modes and thus in reducing car dependency. The bicycle
competes with car and public transport on much larger distances
than walking does. In the Netherlands generally <U+FB01>ve requirements
for a good bicycle infrastructure are adopted: connectivity of
the network, directness, safety, attractiveness of the route, and
comfort (CROW, 2007). An additional requirement, in particular
for children and women, is a good security.