School siting and mode choices for school travel: Rural–urban contrasts in                                                                        
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

abstract
Mode choices for school travel are important to children’s health. School size and siting impose constraints on
mode choices, and these factors vary considerably along the rural–urban continuum. Using the Halifax Regional
School Board, Nova Scotia, as a case study, this research examines the e<U+FB00>ects of elementary school size and siting
on mode choices and school busing.
Data for 96 elementary schools in the school district are examined for statistical relationships between school
and catchment area size, rural–urban location, and reliance on school busing. To estimate potential walkability,
a mean Walk Score® was calculated for a 2.4-km pedestrian zone around each school, which represents the
school board’s courtesy busing threshold. Mode choices from “hands-up” tallies at four schools were employed to
calibrate the use of automobile and walking modes.
In inner-city areas, pedestrian zones typically covered almost 90% of the school catchment area, and their
walkability was moderately high. However, in suburban, commuter belt, and rural zones, much less area fell
within the pedestrian zone, and walkability declined considerably. The proportion of students who walked or
cycled for school travel were 40% (inner-city), 37% (suburbs), and only 5% in the commuter belt and rural
zones. On the other hand, more than 80% of children who lived in the commuter belt and rural zones rode the
bus, compared with 30% in the suburbs and only 6% in the inner-city areas. In both the suburban and inner-city
schools, a large proportion of students were chau<U+FB00>eured by car.
Findings suggest that post-1960 school planning for rural areas around Halifax has paid insu<U+FB03>cient attention
to the potential for children to walk or bike to school. Consequently, school consolidation and busing practices
should be reconsidered in light of their negative impacts on the health and well-being of suburban and rural
school children.

1. Introduction                                                                              
												
Research shows that the journey between home and school is the                          
most common travel activity among Canadian children (Stefan and                              
Hunt, 2006), and is thus the most prevalent opportunity for children to                      
regularly engage in physical activity. Yet, Canadian children walk or                        
bike to and from school much less frequently than twenty years ago                           
(Buliung et al., 2009). Inner-city school consolidation policies, which                      
have become a common solution to declining enrolment for many Canadian 
and American school boards (City of Hamilton, 2012), may have                         
contributed to the progressive decline of children’s active school travel                    
(AST). School consolidation in rural areas, too, which is often a<U+FB00>ected                      
by the siting of new schools in “central” locations remote from existing                     
communities, also increases reliance on vehicular travel and reduces    
                    
opportunities for walking and bicycling.
In Nova Scotia, similar to other North American areas where rural
school districts still predominate, student population decline, school
closures, and school consolidation policies have led to escalation in
both the proportion of students bused and bus transportation costs
(Bennett and Gillis, 2015). However, there has been little research to
date on the combined impacts of these school size and siting policies on
school bus reliance and AST mode choices (mainly walking, cycling,
and wheeling), and, in particular, no peer-reviewed Canadian research
comparing urban and rural relationships between size/siting and travel
mode choices. By using the Halifax Regional School Board (HRSB) as a
case study, this research investigates the e<U+FB00>ects of elementary school
size and siting on school travel mode choice, and emphasises how these
relationships vary along the urban–rural continuum. In particular, this

case study examines the size and con<U+FB01>guration of each school catchment 
area (SCA), the walkability of the neighborhoods immediately
surrounding each school, and the extent of reliance on school busing.
To validate the analysis, data on revealed preferences for school travel
modes at four elementary schools are included in the study.

2. Previous studies

Mode choices for travel to school are important for a variety of
reasons, including e<U+FB00>ects on children’s health, environmental e<U+FB00>ects of
vehicular travel, time and <U+FB01>nancial costs to parents, and costs of busing
for school boards. There is a considerable literature on the health
bene<U+FB01>ts of AST, and much complementary research on environmental
and other costs related to vehicular school travel. Associated research
on mode choices has been well summarized recently by Ermagun and
Samimi (2015). A plethora of variables have been considered as in<U+FB02>uential, 
and many have been shown to have statistically signi<U+FB01>cant effects. 
The speci<U+FB01>c variables may be grouped into several broad classes,
which we may term locational, environmental, socio-demographic, and
institutional. Locational factors relate to the child’s distance from the
school, which in turn is related to rural–urban di<U+FB00>erences in population
density, and to school sizes and siting (Ermagun and Samimi, 2017). In
addition, municipal transit services are typically unavailable in rural
and semi-rural areas (Ermagun and Levinson, 2017). Environmental
factors concern both built and natural environments along routes to
school, such as the presence/absence of sidewalks, or the perceived
crime rates in an area (e.g. Curtis et al., 2015; Yu and Zhu, 2015). Sociodemographic 
factors include the age and sex of the child, family car
ownership, and family time-use constraints (e.g. Oliver et al., 2014).
Institutional factors concern policies on school size and siting, catchment 
area boundaries, and provision of courtesy school busing
(Ermagun et al., 2015).

2.1. Health bene<U+FB01>ts of active school travel

Active school travel is an important component of youth’s physical
activity and social contact, as it can conveniently integrate physical
activity into children’s daily lives (Binns et al., 2009; Davis et al., 2007),
and provide opportunities for socialization (Zwerts et al., 2010). Indeed, 
several health bene<U+FB01>ts are associated with walking and bicycling
for home-school travel (Lubans et al., 2011), including higher levels of
physical activity (Cooper et al., 2010; Voss and Sandercock, 2010),
more bene<U+FB01>cial weight status (Klein-Platat et al., 2005) and better
cardio-respiratory <U+FB01>tness (Chillón et al., 2012). Active school travel has
also been associated with higher cognitive and academic performance
(Martínez-Gómez et al., 2011), and greater independent mobility (Fyhri
and Hjorthol, 2009), which can promote several psychological skills
(Prezza et al., 2001). Yet, despite many health bene<U+FB01>ts associated with
AST modes, there is evidence in many Western nations that the proportion 
of school children who use active modes for trips to and from
school has been consistently declining in recent decades, including the
United States (Ewing and Greene, 2003), United Kingdom (Dollman
et al., 2005), and Canada (Buliung et al., 2009).

2.2. Costs of vehicular school travel

Home-school vehicular travel, whether by car or bus, has important
environmental impacts, as it accounts for a considerable proportion of
all vehicle travel (McDonald et al., 2011). In the United States, 55% of
school trips were made by car in 2011, up from 16% in 1969, and this
increase has signi<U+FB01>cant implications in terms of tra<U+FB03>c congestion
around schools, localized air pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, and
reduced child safety in walking to and from school (Wilson et al., 2007).
There are burdens placed on those parents/guardians who chau<U+FB00>eur
their children between home and school, often requiring adjustments to
routes and schedules, and imposing a variety of costs (Litman, 2015). In

addition, especially in rural areas where large consolidated schools are
spaced far apart, school busing has become a major administrative cost.
Rural districts spend disproportionately on student transportation services, 
and rural schools may spend upwards of 6 to 8 percent of their
budget on school busing, while non-rural districts spend around four
percent (Killeen and Sipple, 2000). Busing also has signi<U+FB01>cant costs to
the bused students, who often endure upwards of two hours per day in
bus travel, which has physical, social, and emotional implications. For
example, bused students report being stressed and tired, getting lower
grades, participating in fewer after-school activities, and spending less
time with their families (Eyre and Finn, 2002).

2.3. Locational and institutional in<U+FB02>uences on mode choice

Although environmental and socio-demographic variables are also
important determinants of mode choice, in this paper we focus only on
locational and institutional factors, with emphasis on rural–urban differences.
Distance from home to school is probably the single most
important determinant of mode choice for school travel (Duncan et al.,
2016; Ermagun and Samimi, 2017; Millward and Spinney, 2011;
Spinney and Millward, 2011; Spinney et al., 2018). School siting a<U+FB00>ects
this distance, as does the spatial distribution of the children being
served, and these two distributions are of course linked. When determining 
the location of a new school and its future student population, 
school boards typically consider a variety of competing requirements, 
such as demographics, land a<U+FB00>ordability, access to amenities,
attendance boundaries and con<U+FB01>guration, stability of student population, 
travel distance, and the size of the property (Tsai and Miller,
2005). Until the 1950s, small neighborhood schools were the “anchor
points” of urban neighborhoods, which provided a wide range of afterschool 
programs, plus social and recreational services (Passmore,
2002). However, in recent decades, school size policies have tended to
favour the construction of larger schools, which are perceived to be
necessary to accommodate the continued expansion of academic and
recreational programs, provide the threshold student numbers to allow
provision of specialized infrastructure and student services, serve entire
communities, and allow for expansion in the future (McDonald, 2010;
Deka and von Hagen, 2015).
In the United States, studies have shown that elementary students in
rural areas are likely to experience bus rides that are 30 min or greater
than suburban students (Howley et al., 2001). Research has pointed out
the possible implications of rural school busing in terms of school
achievement, disruption of family life (e.g. reduced time available to
children and parents for recreational activities) and community cohesion 
(Howley and Smith, 2000). Others have argued that long bus rides
have economic costs that are not accounted for in school consolidation
practices (Witham, 1997). Studies have also shown that parents often
mention long bus rides as a reason for opposing school district consolidation 
plans (Spence, 2000). Yet, the issue of rural school busing has
been surprisingly overlooked in the United States (Howley and Smith,
2000). Similarly, in Canada, very little is known about the e<U+FB00>ects of
school consolidation schemes, but data show that annual busing costs
have risen at a time of signi<U+FB01>cantly declining student enrolments, while
several community groups have started to promote healthy transportation 
alternatives and advocate for a closer look at the impacts of
school consolidation and busing on children’s health (Bennett and
Gillis, 2015).
In higher-density urban and suburban areas, the catchment areas of
newer and larger schools may still be small enough to allow many
students to choose AST modes. However, in lower-density rural areas,
the shift to larger schools has required consolidation of formerly localized 
catchment areas into extensive ones that are almost entirely reliant 
on school busing (Killeen and Sipple, 2000). These consolidated
school districts in rural areas are characterized by low student densities
spread over large geographic areas, with schools often placed in isolated 
locations, equally far from several population clusters. In turn,


rural school districts are forced to provide additional buses and longer             
routes to meet the larger demand of students entitled to courtesy                    
busing, as they live farther from the remaining schools (Howley, 1996).              
In rural areas, therefore, school busing is both a cause and consequence             
of the greater spacing between schools necessitated by larger school                 
sizes. This disconnect between the school site selection process and land            
use planning considerations is exempli<U+FB01>ed by a study conducted in                    
South Carolina, which found that school sites constructed since 1983,               
often at the edge of communities in rural and undeveloped land, are 41               
percent larger than sites built before 1983, and that students were four                 
times more likely to walk to the pre-1983 schools (Kouri, 1999).                     
Critics of school sprawl now contend that large campuses in lowdensity 
areas lead to fewer children living within a convenient walking              
distance to schools. Indeed, research consistently shows that distance to            
school is the strongest predictor of AST and that children are more                  
likely to walk and bike to school when the immediate areas surrounding              
schools are densely populated (Spinney and Millward, 2011; Spinney                   
et al., 2018). Evidence also suggests that children living in rural areas            
are less likely to actively commute to school than those living in urban             
areas (Davison et al., 2008), because of longer commuting distances,                 
lower residential density, and less infrastructure for safe walking and              
biking (Dalton et al., 2011).                                                        
																														
3. Data and methods                                                                  
											
The HRSB was created in 1996 through the amalgamation of three                   
individual boards that operated schools in Halifax and Dartmouth,                    
Halifax County, and Bedford. It serves about 48,000 students in 136                  
schools, and is the largest school board in Atlantic Canada, with schools            
located in urban, suburban, and rural areas of the county-sized Halifax              
Regional Municipality (HRM) (HRSB, 2017). In this study, all HRSB’s                  
elementary schools were classi<U+FB01>ed along the rural–urban settlement                   
zones, previously described in the literature, which divided HRM into                
<U+FB01>ve geographical zones based on residential density, percent developed
area, and commuting linkages to the downtowns of Halifax and Dartmouth 
(Millward and Spinney, 2011). For simpli<U+FB01>cation purposes, the                  
last two zones were combined into a single category (Rural), which
classi<U+FB01>es all areas beyond 25 km by road from Halifax or another large                    
town (Table 1).                                                                      
This study examined 89 elementary schools and seven elementary/                  
junior high schools spread throughout HRSB. Exclusively French-language 
schools were excluded from the analysis, since they are administered 
by a separate school board with signi<U+FB01>cantly larger catchment 
areas. Data on school characteristics, student enrollment, and                  
school busing were retrieved from a recent report published by HRSB                  
(2016), while the geographic boundaries of the SCAs were downloaded                  
from the HRSB website (HRSB, 2017). Children’s revealed preferences                  
for mode choice were collected in four inner city and suburban schools,              
whereby students reported their travel mode to and from school                       
through classroom-based ‘hands-up’ surveys. These data were collected                
by the Ecology Action Center, a Nova Scotia-based non-pro<U+FB01>t organization 
that works towards the development of sustainable local communities (Barlow, 2012).                                                             
To estimate potential walkability, ArcGIS 10.3 Network Analyst was                   

used to develop a 2.4-km (1.5 mile) pedestrian zone (PZ) around each
school, representing the walking distance threshold set by HRSB’s
current transportation policies; courtesy bus services are provided only
to elementary students who live 2.4 km or more away from their school
(HRSB, 2013). To provide a realistic assessment of walkability, pedestrian 
zones were based upon existing street and walkway networks,
rather than a simple straight-line distance. Pedestrian zones were then
“clipped” to re<U+FB02>ect the boundaries of the school catchment areas
(Fig. 1).
A walkability score was assigned to each pedestrian zone by calculating 
its mean Walk Score®, which is the only walkability index
readily accessible online for all postal codes in Canada (Chiu et al.,
2015). The literature shows this index to be a valid measure of neighborhood 
walkability in numerous geographic locations and at multiple
spatial scales (Carr et al., 2010, 2011; Duncan et al., 2011, 2013). The
Walk Score® algorithm scores a location based on its proximity to
educational, retail, food, recreational, and entertainment facilities,
while population density, block length, and intersection density are also
included. As shown in Table 2, the <U+FB01>nal score is on a 0 to 100 scale,
divided into <U+FB01>ve walkability categories, with zero representing the most
car-dependent category, and 100 being a “Walker’s Paradise” (Walk
Score®, 2017).
An average Walk Score® was assigned to pedestrian zones by
overlaying a grid of sample points (Fig. 2), and calculating their Walk
Scores® through the WalkScoreAPI, an R package that takes a set of
geographic coordinates and returns the Walk Score® associated with
those locations (Whalen, 2011). Lastly, residential density was estimated 
by retrieving 2011 census tract data on private dwellings from
the CHASS website (Canadian Census Analyzer, 2017). Census tract
data were then assigned to the corresponding schools based on their
location. IBM’s Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) was
correlation coe<U+FB03>cients to assess the statistical relationships between
the variables.

4. Results

The results in Table 3 summarize mean school characteristics for
schools in each of the four urban–rural zones. Almost half of the schools
are considered suburban, with the rest almost equally split between
inner city, inner commuter belt (ICB), and rural areas. Inner city schools
are by far the oldest schools in the district. They declined in enrollments
for much of the post-1960 period, as did rural schools, while suburban
schools experienced burgeoning enrollments. However, since 2006
student enrollment has increased in the inner city and declined in all
other settlement zones, especially in the ICB and in rural areas. Re<U+FB02>ecting 
declining student enrollments, schools in rural areas have the
highest mean <U+FB02>oor area per student, while suburban and ICB schools
remain crowded, with less <U+FB02>oor area per student. Inner city schools
have the largest building footprint, but they are built on smaller
properties that are often extensions of neighborhood parks. Schools in
other zones tend to be built on larger sites; on average, suburban
schools occupy the largest sites.
When considering the con<U+FB01>guration of the SCAs, substantial

di<U+FB00>erences across settlement zones exist. The average SCA size for inner
city schools is only 2.1 km2. However, average SCA areas become exponentially 
larger as one moves outwards, and approach 300 km2 in the
rural areas. Student density presents a reverse pattern, declining from
the center until reaching only one student per km2 in rural areas. The
spatial relationships between SCAs and pedestrian zones also vary
considerably across the school district. Inner-city areas of Halifax and
Dartmouth, on average, have pedestrian zones that cover nearly all the                                 
catchment areas’ land, and six catchment areas are 100% within HRSB’s
walking threshold. In the suburbs, the pedestrian zones still cover over             
half the SCA’s, on average, but in the ICB and rural areas only small                    
portions of SCA’s are covered by pedestrian zones.                                   
In terms of school siting, especially in suburban and rural areas,              
schools tend to be located in auto-dependent neighborhoods, where the                
pedestrian zones surrounding the schools present very low walkability                
scores. As shown in Fig. 3, while the median Walk Score® was 64.5 for                
inner city schools, corresponding to a “somewhat walkable” category,                 
all the other schools’ walk zones had very low Walk Scores®, delineating             
areas where a car is required to perform everyday activities, because of             

the longer distances to frequently visited amenities.
The population density of areas surrounding schools is pertinent to
both school siting and school travel mode choice. In the inner city,
elementary schools are in census tracts with an average dwelling density 
exceeding 2000 private dwellings per km2. In the suburbs, the
number of dwellings per km2 is only 754, and the density falls o<U+FB00> rapidly 
to very low levels in the ICB and rural areas. Figs. 4 and 5 visually
con<U+FB01>rm these trends by comparing the street layouts of neighborhoods
adjacent to four typical elementary schools. In the inner-city areas,
schools are likely to be found near the center of their catchment areas,

and in close proximity to residential dwellings. In the other settlement
zones, elementary schools are much more likely to be situated on the
outskirts of communities, and typically more distant from residential
properties, which results in fewer children living within a convenient
walking distance.
With more children living farther from their school, it is not surprising 
that a large proportion of elementary students need to be bused.
During the 2015/16 school year, more than 80% of children living in
the inner commuter belt and rural areas had to be bused between home
and school. In the suburbs, about 30% of students needed bus services,

while only 6% of children in the inner-city areas rode the school bus
(Fig. 6). Spearman’s rank-correlations are presented in Table 4. Area of
the school’s SCA has the strongest correlation with busing, and other
variables associated with it (student density and PZ as percent of SCA
area) also show similarly large and signi<U+FB01>cant correlations. Interestingly, 
school busing was negatively correlated with the Walk Score® of
the pedestrian zone (<U+03C1> = -0.69; p < 0.01). Since students living in the
pedestrian zone are not entitled to busing, one might expect no e<U+FB00>ect.
However, the two variables are linked symptoms of low residential
density in rural areas. Only a small proportion of ICB and rural students
reside within pedestrian zones, and as Fig. 5 suggests, even the pedestrian 
zones display low connectivity, and low land-use mix.
School age is negatively and signi<U+FB01>cantly correlated with school
busing, indicating that more recent schools tend to be built farther
away from densely populated areas. The relationship, however, is not
very strong. As to school size, it is noteworthy that this variable,
measured by enrollment, lacks a signi<U+FB01>cant correlation with percent of
students bussed. This is understandable when we note that ICB schools
have large enrollments, while rural schools have low enrollments, but
both are heavily reliant on busing.
The “hands-up” tally data con<U+FB01>rmed that students in suburban
schools are less likely to walk or bike to school, and more likely to ride
the school bus. As shown in Table 5, on average, 38% of school children
walked to suburban schools and 20% rode the school bus, compared to
49% of inner-city school children and 1% rode the school bus. For example, 
the suburban Colby Village school shows a high proportion of
walking, and also has key characteristics of an inner-city school, notably 
a small SCA area and high proportion of SCA in the PZ. In contrast, 
Cavalier Drive is perhaps more typically suburban, with less

walking owing to a larger SCA and smaller proportion of SCA in the PZ.             
In both the suburban and inner-city schools, a signi<U+FB01>cant proportion of            
parents (37% and 40%, respectively) chose to drive their children to               
school, even in the cases where over 75% of the SCA (and presumably                
because suburban households are more likely to have two vehicles, thus
of the students) lies within the pedestrian zone.

5. Discussion

This study shows that larger catchment areas greatly constrain the
possibility for elementary school children in the Halifax region to be
physically active for their journey to and from school. Rural-urban
contrasts in walkability are very strong: for inner-city schools, on
average, 90% of their catchment area (and presumably of their students) 
lies within walking range (2.4 km), and this proportion remains
over 60% in the suburbs. Beyond the continuously-developed suburbs,
however, in the exurban inner commuter belt (ICB), there is a marked
decline to only 8%, and the proportion is a woeful 2% in rural areas.
Parents in the commuter belt and rural zones mostly, therefore, rely on
school bus services, and over 80% of students in both zones are bused.
By extension, results suggest that approximately 5% of students in both
ICB and rural zones employ AST modes, and 15% are chau<U+FB00>eured by
their parents.
These results show how post-1960 school planning for rural areas of
the HRSB has paid insu<U+FB03>cient attention to the potential for children to
walk or bike to school and to the imposition of unnecessarily long bus
commutes. To some extent, reliance on busing in the countryside is
unavoidable, but it was not always so. In the days of the one-room
schoolhouse, common into the 1960s, schools were present in most
rural communities, and the majority of rural students walked to school.
The adoption of policies favoring large consolidated schools, while
made for sound administrative and pedagogic reasons, required schools
sited far apart, and had seemingly incidental, but seriously negative,
e<U+FB00>ects on student welfare. Walking to and from school is no longer an
option for most Nova Scotian students, and many now spend long hours
on the bus. An issue that warrants increased attention from academics,
school planners, and public health practitioners alike.
This case study used HRSB busing data for all elementary schools
throughout the entire study area, but only had access to data on
walking and parental chau<U+FB00>euring for a limited number of schools in
the inner-city and suburbs. “Hands-up” tallies for these schools, however, 
clearly indicate that many parents who live within the 2.4 km
pedestrian zone still choose to drive their children to school, supporting
those studies that have found that many parents drive their children
regardless of distance (He and Giuliano, 2017; Lee et al., 2013) or the
walkability of the environment (Mah et al., 2017). This is perhaps more
understandable in the auto-oriented suburbs, either because the parents
themselves commute by automobile and can conveniently combine the
trips, while spending time with their children (Westman et al., 2017), or

facilitating the chau<U+FB00>euring option. In the inner-city, similar reasons
may often apply, and there may also be greater concerns about pedestrian 
safety, which tend to discourage walking and encourage parental 
chau<U+FB00>euring (Mehdizadeh et al., 2016).
The policy implication is that to increase AST, in addition to improving 
the infrastructure for walking and cycling, policy makers
should also address parental time constraints and parents’ perceptions
on safety issues. In Canada, multi-sectorial, school-speci<U+FB01>c School
Travel Planning (STP) strategies have been implemented to promote
AST (Mammen et al., 2014). Although their e<U+FB00>ectiveness is inconclusive, 
research suggests that these interventions are more e<U+FB00>ective
when they focus on parents’ perceived safety (Buliung et al., 2011).
Other studies have shown that children are more likely to engage in
AST in schools that employ crossing guards, identify safe routes to
school, and observe tra<U+FB03>c calming measures (Larouche et al., 2014),
and that children consider tra<U+FB03>c-related barriers as very risky factors
(Fusco et al., 2012). Although it may be di<U+FB03>cult to recruit su<U+FB03>cient
volunteer support (Buliung et al., 2011), one promising way to potentially
reduce car travel is the use of Walking School Buses programs, as
parents share chaperoning responsibilities by taking turn in walking
groups of children to school (McDonald, 2008).

6. Strengths and limitations

This case study has two major strengths: 1) it is the <U+FB01>rst attempt to
investigate in Canada the e<U+FB00>ects of school consolidation policies on
school bus reliance and the propensity of elementary students to walk
or bike to and from school; and, 2) it reveals that the decisions made
about the size and locations of schools in rural areas seriously limit
elementary school children’s AST and exacerbate reliance on busing.
Yet, this study is not without limitations. As previously noted, “Hands
up” tallies were available only for four schools, which limited the

ability to compare revealed mode choices preferences with the size and
con<U+FB01>guration of the SCAs for the whole study area. In addition, although 
useful as a general indicator of walkability, the Walk Score®
index has limitations when applied to the journey to school, since the
primary destination of interest to students and their parents is the
school itself. To strengthen the analysis, a school-speci<U+FB01>c walkability
index should be developed.

7. Conclusions

This research investigated the e<U+FB00>ects of elementary school size and
siting on school travel mode choice, with emphasis on how these relationships 
vary along the urban–rural continuum. Study results contribute 
to the North American policy debate on whether schools should
be sited and sized to encourage active transportation, and on where
such a policy goal is feasible. They provide evidence that rural and
outer suburban areas face particular challenges and require more effective 
strategies to promote walking and cycling to and from school.
We concur with those authors who have highlighted the need to reconsider 
school consolidation practices in light of transportation ine<U+FB03>ciencies 
and their disproportionate impacts on the health and wellbeing 
of rural and suburban school children (Howley, 2001; Killeen and
Sipple, 2000; Steiner et al., 2008).
We acknowledge that school buses are often the only way for many
students to get to school on time every day, especially for those students
with disabilities, special needs, and families with lower incomes who
may not own a car. Yet, this is only part of the issue, and local planners
and policy-makers should also consider children’s health, students’
engagement and academic achievement, community well-being, and
environmental sustainability, when making decisions on school siting
and transportation policies.