Children's incidental social interaction during travel international case                                                                                     
studies from Canada, Japan, and Sweden<U+2606>

Incidental social interactions such as seeing a known person while travelling are theorized to contribute to
community connections and social capital. It is argued in such work that walking may be a critical factor, but the
frequency of such interactions is generally unknown. For children, these community connections may increase
independent travel and contribute to their well-being. Previous research out of Japan found that walking was
indeed more likely to result in children seeing people in general and seeing a known person. However, it is not
clear whether that is a culturally anecdotal <U+FB01>nding, or whether similar <U+FB01>ndings would occur in di<U+FB00>erent cultural
and transportation contexts. Reasons why it may be anecdotal include: in most cases, all elementary school
children walk to school in Japan; many trips occur at a local level and are conducted by non-motorized modes in
Japan; greeting others (aisatsu) is a cultural value in Japan. This study examines whether one's transport mode
relates to having incidental social interaction during their trips for children aged 10–11 in Canada (177), Japan
(178), and Sweden (144). Further to previous work, the research carried out here asked the children what type of
interaction occurred (spoke, waved, no interaction, or other) which would relate to building or maintaining
community connections. The <U+FB01>ndings demonstrate that the results are internationally applicable and that most
incidental social interactions result in a verbal communication in all three countries.

1. Introduction                                                                                     
												
Previous research has found relationships between children's travel                        
and incidental community connections (Waygood and Friman, 2015;                                 
Waygood and Kitamura, 2009). That research showed that children                                 
who walk and who travel independently were more likely to see others                            
during travel, and, in particular, to see others that they knew. However,                       
the survey was conducted in Japan where a cultural value is placed on                           
saying hello to others (aisatsu). As well, as highlighted recently in a                         
review of literature on transport and child well-being (Waygood et al.,                         
2017) anecdotal results (i.e. results from one country/city) need to be                         
tested in diverse contexts to test whether the results are consistent or                        
not. Thus, the question remains whether the <U+FB01>ndings are robust; would                           
they be found in other cultures or locations? Further, related to building                      
or maintaining community connections, when the children notice                                  
others, what type of interaction occurs (e.g. simply notice the other,                          
wave, speak, or some other interaction)?                                                        

Social connections are important for building and maintaining social 
capital and community cohesion, but also in general, social relationships. 
Mental health measures such as social relationships were
found to have a higher impact on mortality than alcohol consumption,
physical activity, body-mass index (obesity), and air quality; and the
impacts are not age-dependent (Holt-Lunstad et al., 2010). As well,
Helliwell and Putnam (2004) found that neighbourhood and community 
ties support both physical and subjective well-being. Important to
the current research, Helliwell and Putnam also cite work showing a
positive relationship between social networks and improved child
welfare. Thus, social relationships are important for health, but most
studies on the relationships between children's travel and their health
and well-being have focused on physical aspects such as active travel
(e.g. Bates and Stone, 2015; Schoeppe et al., 2013) or collisions (e.g.
Rothman et al., 2014; Toroyan and Peden, 2007). Further to links with
mortality, social relationships are also a strong explanatory factor of
subjective well-being, which is a person's evaluation of their overall

well-being. This is again true for both adults and children (Diener and
Biswas-Diener, 2011; Park, 2004).
Children's transportation and health and well-being research has
focused primarily on active travel, while little has examined how
transportation might in<U+FB02>uence social interactions. There are numerous
types of social interaction including planned, spontaneous, virtual, or
face-to-face. They can happen at a destination, but they can also happen
during a trip. Sociologists (e.g. Grannis, 2011) suggest that walking in a
neighbourhood can contribute to social capital as individuals will incidentally 
see others, and then gradually develop these incidental interactions 
into conversations and deeper social relationships. In transportation 
literature, Carver et al. (2005), using a questionnaire on
general travel behaviour and general perceptions of neighbourhood,
found that children who reported walking for transport were statistically 
more likely to have responded that they waved or talked with
their neighbours.
Incidental community connections can help build social capital.
Grannis (2011) explains four steps starting from two individuals that do
not know each other but have geographic proximity. The possibility of
walking to local destinations creates the chance that those individuals
would see each other. If this is frequent enough, familiarity would increase, 
and some social interaction could develop (e.g. nodding hello,
smiling, small talk, etc.). Eventually, this may lead to intentional social
interaction (e.g. visiting the neighbour's home). Through this process,
Grannis argues how a walkable, mixed-use environment might support
social capital in a community. Related to this, a study that compared
highly walkable neighbourhoods to ones with low walkability found
that children depicted in drawings of their neighbourhoods more active
travel and peer interaction in the highly walkable neighbourhoods
(Holt et al., 2008). Waygood and Friman (2015) also found that the
most urbanized areas had the most incidental community connections.
Walking and independent travel were associated with a greater
likelihood of seeing others and seeing people that the children knew
while travelling (Waygood and Friman, 2015). However, the sample
was from one region of Japan and it may have been an anecdotal
<U+FB01>nding. Thus, would the result hold for a di<U+FB00>erent area of Japan that is
less urban? Further, as Japan values and encourages greeting others, as
well as having a population that walks at high rates (e.g. Susilo and
Waygood, 2012; Waygood and Kitamura, 2009; Waygood et al., 2015a)
it may be an anecdotal <U+FB01>nding for that country. As well, few trips by the
children in Waygood and Friman (2015) were by car, which may not
re<U+FB02>ect the reality of some Western countries. Thus, would the results
hold in a country where the majority of travel by children is now by
car?
The scienti<U+FB01>c objectives of this research are to determine whether a)
are the results robust (e.g. can they be replicated)? b) Would the relationship 
hold for countries where much more of children's travel is by
car?

2. Background

2.1. Community connections

For children, the bene<U+FB01>ts of better community connections include
improved social skills, social interaction, well-being and safety.
Interactions with adults, particularly adults who are not the child's
parent(s) were associated with improved social skills for the child
(Azuma et al., 1992). Such adults could be described as alloparents,1
who can provide other important bene<U+FB01>ts such as safety and support
(see below).

Social interactions help children to feel a sense of community
(Pretty et al., 1996). If a child has strong community connections, then
they may be more likely to have social interaction while travelling or

performing some activity in their community. Such face-to-face interaction, 
as opposed to on-line interaction, has been found to be the most
important factor in establishing and sustaining social interactions
(Urry, 2002). Positive social interactions and opportunities for identity
development were found to enhance connection to the children's environment 
(Depeau, 2001). Relationships with members of a child's
community play a role in building social networks known to a<U+FB00>ect
children's well-being and a sense of belonging (Compas et al., 1986).
Social interaction and a sense of belonging are also important
contributions to subjective well-being and quality of life (Diener and
Biswas-Diener, 2011; Helliwell and Putnam, 2004; Sirgy, 2012) which
also applies to adolescents and young children (Park, 2004; Pretty et al.,
1996). For adults, having frequent interactions with friends and trusting
one's neighbours and community are related to life satisfaction and
happiness (two key elements of subjective well-being) as well as physical 
health (Helliwell and Putnam, 2004). Well-being and social relationships 
are associated and the absence of loneliness makes children
healthier. Having friendly neighbours is negatively related to feelings of
loneliness or experiencing sadness in adults (Helliwell and Putnam,
2004). Although this last relationship has not been demonstrated for
children, it would seem intuitive that similar results would be found for
them.
For well-being in life it is important for children to be in contact
with and interact with other known people, to have parents that protect
them and treat them well and to have a personal, safe place to be
(Fattore et al., 2007; Pollard and Lee, 2003). The interactions can be
‘bonding’ where the child would make connections with other children,
or ‘bridging’ where the child would make links with those dissimilar to
themselves (e.g. adults, children of di<U+FB00>erent ages or contexts). Feeling
and being safe is an important part of children's subjective well-being
(focuses on how children are feeling, often operationalized as degree of
valence and activation). For children's well-being, Westman et al.
(2013) found that children who travelled to school by car experienced
signi<U+FB01>cantly less activation (i.e. to a higher extent they felt tired,
sleepy, and dull) than those who biked to school. A lack of social interactions 
with others apart from their family could be part of the explanation 
of why children experience a lower degree of well-being
when they go by car.
Community connections can in<U+FB02>uence the sense of safety for the
child and their parent(s). One reason is that known people may make
the children feel secure and, if needed, provide help. Depeau (2001)
found that for youth, ‘the possibility of casual social interaction with
people they knew, whether an adult or a peer, was certainly an attribute
that allowed children to feel con<U+FB01>dent about being in a place, especially
if they were alone’ (pg. 85). Parents may gain a sense of safety through
what is termed ‘high visibility’ (Bonner, 1997). High visibility is used to
describe how someone is always around observing behaviour, and any
bad behaviour by children would eventually make it back to parents.
The parents of Bonner's study (Bonner, 1997) felt that if their children
were always near someone they knew, their behaviour would be more
restrained (they would not do bad things without someone who knew
them <U+FB01>nding out), and a known person could help if the need arose. In
children's travel literature that concept was described by McDonald
(2005) who commented that common sense suggests that parents'
willingness to allow children to travel independently depends on their
trust of their neighbours to act on behalf of their children, both to
protect their safety and control their bad behaviour. This echoes
Hillman et al. (1990) who proposed that the higher independent travel
by West German children (to British children) could potentially be
explained by cultural di<U+FB00>erences.2 Those thoughts are supported by
Prezza et al. (2001) found that Italian mothers with a high amount of
neighbourhood relations were more likely to grant their child

autonomy. In a later study, McDonald et al. (2010) found that a variable 
for parents who reported a high level of social control was associated 
with a higher rate of walking or biking to school.

2.2. Travel behaviour context on community connections

Travel is not often directly studied in research on community networks
or social capital (Stanley and Stanley, 2014). Grannis (2011) found that
most neighbour connections were established when parents were walking
with their children to local destinations such as school or the school bus
stop. He also found that for people without children, walking dogs explained 
nearly half of the neighbour connections that people had. However, 
he discusses as well that it is di<U+FB03>cult to measure such interactions.
One thing emerges from his research though: people walking locally start
to develop community connections. Thus, the general travel behaviour
context of the three study areas of this research is needed.
It is perhaps easier to notice people if they are walking regardless of
whether one is in a car, on a bus, or walking themselves. As such, a
general sense of how many people might be walking gives some context
of this likelihood. Often statistics on travel are focused on adults, but
the study here was not limited to only seeing a known adult, so statistics
on both children's and adults' travel is given below for each country.

2.2.1. Canada

Based on data from 1996 to 2001, Pabayo et al. (2011) found that
active travel to elementary schools in Canada peaked at the age of 10 at
under 35%. A study of children based on data from a 2006 cross-sectional 
survey in the Toronto region (Canada's largest city) reported that
for children aged 11–12 (n = 2520), 58% came by active modes and
42% by passive modes (Mitra and Buliung, 2012). Larsen et al. (2009)
found that for the city of London (a medium-sized city for Canada),
Ontario 62% of children aged 11 to 13 used active modes to school, and
72% from school to home. Although Pabayo et al. (2011) did <U+FB01>nd that
living in an urban area increased the likelihood of active travel 3.7
times, the results of the studies cited here are somewhat at odds in that
the majority of the population live in urban areas.
National travel patterns for adults are available for trips to work,
though this is not necessarily the majority of trips for the entire population 
(e.g. Miller and Shalaby, 2003). Statistics Canada for the year
2011 found that under half the population commute to work, and that
80% of those trips are by car (74% single occupancy, 5.6% as passengers).3 
The Greater Toronto Area (GTA) has had a relatively stable
modal share from 1964 to 1996 where personal cars trips represent just
under 80%. For the morning peak, the city of Toronto (as opposed to
the GTA) had a modal share of 38.9% for car and passenger, OttawaGatineau 
55%, Calgary, 60.9%, and Vancouver 54.6% (Kim, 2008).
Thus, for the population in urban centres, the rates of car use are lower.
However, overall, the majority of trips in Canada were by car.

2.2.2. Sweden

Children's everyday mobility has decreased in Sweden. Suggested
explanations are growing tra<U+FB03>c volumes, higher speeds and more aggressive 
driving, increased distances to schools, services and leisure
activities, as well as a growing concern among parents for the aspects of
safety and security (Faskunger, 2008). The likelihood that children
would go on their own to various destinations in Sweden has decreased
from 1981 to 2003. As an example of this development, Faskunger
(2008) showed how in the 1980s almost all Swedish children were allowed 
to go on their own to school while the <U+FB01>gure had dropped to
under 70% in 2003.
Children aged 6–15 years in Sweden make on average 3.1 trips per
day (Schmidt and Neergaard, 2007) mostly by bicycle (34% of all trips)


or car (33% of all trips). A main destination is school and these trips are
mostly made by foot or bicycle. Swedish national statistics from 1995 to
2014 showed that children (6–14 years) cycled distances 42% shorter
now as compared to distances in the mid-1990s. Adolescents and young
adults (15–24 years) cycled distances 46% shorter during the same time
period (Swedish national statistics, 2015a). Cars are the main mode for
leisure activities (a <U+FB01>fth of the total number of trips made). Almost no 6year-olds 
walked or cycled on their own to school, but four out of <U+FB01>ve
11-year-olds did. Ninety-<U+FB01>ve percent of children aged 6–15 have access
to a bicycle regardless of age, gender and place of residence. Schmidt
and Neergaard (2007) found that 29% of all trips were made alone,
43% were accompanied by parents/adults, and 28% were accompanied
by siblings or friends.
General national travel patterns for people in Sweden aged 6–84 are
available for trips performed outside the home. Statistics Sweden for
the year 2011–2014 showed that almost 50% of the trips were work
trips, school trips and business travel (Swedish National statistics,
2015b). About 30% were trips for leisure purposes, which includes
visiting friends, participating in community programs, visiting cultural
activities, and doing a recreational activity. Approximately 14% of the
trips were made to reach a service (e.g., doctor's visit) or for shopping
purposes. On average, 80% of the population moved outside their
home, and 60% of those trips were conducted by car. Men travelled in
general more frequently by car whereas women used to a greater extent
active modes (walking and cycling).

2.2.3. Japan

In general in Japan, car use rates are increasing and walking rates
are decreasing (Xu et al., 2015). Figs. 1 and 2 show Japanese car and
walk trip modal share transition by age (based on Xu et al., 2015).
Elementary aged children had the highest walking rates at > 70% in
2010. This is because the majority of children in elementary school in
Japan walk to school in walking school buses (Waygood et al., 2015b).
Although the walking school buses are not often used for the return trip,
most children also walk home (e.g. Waygood and Kitamura, 2009).
For areas where the previous study was conducted (Waygood and
Friman, 2015), the majority of the population live in urban areas where
the majority of travel is not by private motorized vehicles (Waygood
et al., 2015a). Activities such as shopping during the week are still
carried out on non-motorized modes to local destinations (e.g. Kitamura
et al., 2008). Thus, as many people are walking or cycling, there should
be a greater likelihood of seeing others.

2.2.4. Summary of transport di<U+FB00>erences

Thus, it can be seen that Japan likely has the highest percentage of
people walking or cycling, followed by Sweden, then Canada. As a
person who is walking is likely travelling slower, they would be visible
for longer periods, thus potentially increasing the likelihood that they
would be seen.

2.3. Anticipated in<U+FB02>uences

Each mode is anticipated to have di<U+FB00>erent in<U+FB02>uences (Waygood and
Friman, 2015). Walking is anticipated to have the strongest relationship
on seeing a known person based on previous <U+FB01>ndings (Waygood and
Friman, 2015). Cycling is likely also a means of transport at a local
level, but may require greater attention due to tra<U+FB03>c danger and thus
seeing known people might be reduced, following previous work (ibid).
A child in a car could very easily occupy themselves with gazing out the
window, but the speed of the car and its sense of enclosure may reduce
the likelihood of seeing people while travelling (again, following previous 
work (ibid)). Linking to Grannis (2011), it was argued that
walking is most probable to result in interactions, as it is likely at a local
level and is slow enough to allow for some interaction. The only hypothesis 
put forward is that the children will make some interaction
when they see a known person.

3. Study description

The data for this research come from paper surveys distributed at
elementary schools in Canada, Japan, and Sweden in 2014–2015. The
surveys were all developed from a common English version and distributed 
in the relevant local language (French in Quebec, Canada). The
surveys were distributed in October for Canada, December for Sweden,
and January in Japan to limit the impact of climate. In total, 529
participant responses (184 in Canada, 189 in Japan, 156 in Sweden)
were kept for this research.

3.1. Study areas

3.1.1. Quebec, Canada

Quebec is the capital city of the province of Quebec in Canada. The
City of Quebec had a population of 516,6204 in 2011 and the metropolitan 
area in 2014 had a population of 800,900.5 For the metropolitan 
area of Quebec City, over 85% of trips to work were by car.6
In the central part of the city, this is reduced to 27 to 58%6, depending
on the neighbourhood.

3.1.2. Hadano, Japan

Hadano is located in Kanagawa prefecture; this is the west side of
the Tokyo Metropolitan Area. The population in April 2016 was
167,000. Hadano city has four railway stations, it takes 1 h from central
Tokyo by rail and it is located in a basin-shaped valley. The main travel
mode for adults commuting in Hadano was by private car (48.4%) and
rail (26.5%) in 2010. The main travel mode of children's travel to
school (7–18 years old) was by foot (62.6%) and rail (21.5%). Bus use
rate was 2.8% for adults and 3.4% for children. Bicycle use rate was
7.6% for adults and 5.6% for children.

3.1.3. Karlstad, Sweden
Karlstad is a medium-sized Swedish city located in Värmland
County. Karlstad city had a population of 87,000 in 2015. The main
travel mode in Karlstad is the private car (used in 59% of all trips). The
number of trips made by bicycle (mainly to work and school) has increased 
by 4% (between 2004 and 2014) and is now equal to 19%. Nine
percent of all trips are done by public transport.

3.2. Participants

The characteristics of the participants and modal shares by country
are given in Table 1. The higher percentage of girls in Japan was
con<U+FB01>rmed; it is simply a demographic anomaly.

4. Analysis

The primary dependent variable for all of the analysis is seeing a
known person during a trip (i.e. between the origin and destination; not
at the destination). The secondary research question relates to what
type of interaction occurred.

4.1. All weekday trips

Here, all weekday trips recorded by the survey that begin or end at
the child's home are included. Over a day, if all trips are considered,
53% of the Canadian children saw a known person on at least one of
their trips, 91% of the Japanese children, and 41% of the Swedish
children.
It can be seen in Table 2 that walking is much more likely (12 ×) to
result in a known person being seen than trips by car. This con<U+FB01>rms the
anticipated relationships discussed above (Section 2.3). Interaction effects 
of gender with country and mode were tested, but were not found
be signi<U+FB01>cant and thus are not included in the <U+FB01>nal model. Trips to
school were 2.4 times more likely to result in a known person being
seen.

The average rates of seeing a known person by mode and country
are shown in Table 3. As can be seen in Table 2, it is statistically more
common for the children in Japan to see a known person on walking
trips than for the participating children in Canada (4.1×) and Sweden
(5.9 ×). This may be tied to the value placed on acknowledging others
(aisatsu), or simply that there are more people walking or cycling to be
seen. No statistical di<U+FB00>erences were found for cycling or car trips.

4.2. Role of independent trips

In previous research (Waygood and Friman, 2015) independent
trips were positively associated with seeing a known person. An independent 
trip is de<U+FB01>ned here as any trip where an adult is not present.

Although some car trips may be with a non-adult in Canada, those trips
could still be considered an escorted trip in that the children participating 
in this study could not independently use that mode. Thus, the
role of independent trips is examined only for non-motorized modes.
For weekday trips, 60% of trips in the Canadian sample were independent, 
75% in Japan, and 64% in Sweden. If a measure of having at
least one trip that was independent is used, 70% of the Canadian
children, 99% of the Japanese children, and 91% of the Swedish children met this measure.

As can be seen in Table 4, independent trips have a positive in<U+FB02>uence 
(4.6 ×) on seeing a known person. It would appear that travelling
independently, the child may be more observant of their surroundings,
or that they are making trips to locations where it is more likely to see a

known person. Trips to school are again shown to be more likely
(2.0 ×) to result in this occurrence. Here, girls are 1.9 times more likely
than boys to see a known person.
The average occurrence of seeing a known person by mode, gender,
and independent trips across the three countries are shown in Table 5.
Statistically (Table 4), compared to bicycle trips, trips on foot are nearly
10× more likely to result in children reporting having seen a known
person. For trips on foot, in Canada it is 9 times less likely than in
Japan, and in Sweden 10 times less likely. Boys in Canada are more
likely (2.5×) than boys in Japan to see a known person (all else being
equal).

4.3. Type of interaction

The question here is: If a child sees a known person, did they have
some kind of social interaction with them? Over all trips in a day, 44%
of children in Canada had some incidental social interaction during
their travels, 71% of Japanese children, and 36% of Swedish.
From Table 6, it can be seen that for the majority of trips in Japan,
the children see someone that they know. In Canada, during roughly
one third of trips a child will see someone they know, and in Sweden
less than one quarter.
If the children do see someone they know, the majority of them
spoke to that person. The Swedish children were the most likely to have
had some interaction (spoke or waved) if they saw someone, followed
by the Canadian children, and <U+FB01>nally the Japanese.
Overall, when occurrences and interactions are both taken into account, 
over one-third of trips by Japanese children resulted in some
interaction, a quarter of Canadian children's trips, and one-<U+FB01>fth of the
Swedish children's trips.
Those results are descriptive, so a multinomial logit analysis was
conducted on the type of interaction for all weekday trips that begin or
end at the child's residence (Table 7). The base case is not seeing
anyone.
From this analysis, a few general things can be noted: gender does
not play a role, and as previously shown walking is more associated
with seeing a known person. For interactions, trips by walking (6.4×)
and cycling (2.3×) are more associated with speaking with the known
person than trips by car. The participants in Canada (- 2.8×) and
Sweden (- 3.7 ×) are less likely to see and speak with someone on trips

than the Japanese children. The only signi<U+FB01>cant relationship for waving
to someone was walking (3.2 ×). For seeing a known person and not
interacting, walking (6.1 ×) is more associated than driving, and the
participants in Canada (-3.3 ×) and Sweden (-8.2 ×) were less likely
to have trips with this result. Finally, only walking (6.2 ×) was more
associated with having some other sort of interaction.

5. Discussion

The previous <U+FB01>ndings by Waygood and Friman (2015) on seeing a
known person while walking were found to be robust within Japan, and
across two di<U+FB00>erent continents, strongly suggesting that the results are
applicable in at least wealthy countries for children's travel in urban
settings. In line with the previous work, independent trips were also
con<U+FB01>rmed to have an in<U+FB02>uence beyond that of mode use. In this study
the importance of the trip to school was highlighted as it is two times
more likely to result in a known person being seen which relates to
previous work by (Grannis, 2011). Further, in this new research, it was
shown that the vast majority of such occurrences result in some interaction, 
with the majority of cases resulted in verbal interaction.
Di<U+FB00>erences were found between the countries, with the Japanese
children reporting more frequently trips where they spoke to someone,
but the di<U+FB00>erence for waving was not signi<U+FB01>cant. The Japanese children
were also more likely to see someone, but not interact. A number of
possible explanations exist for this. One may be that small interactions
are occurring such as eye contact, small hand or head movements that
are not being captured by our survey. It could also be that if one regularly 
sees people, it is not “an event”, so one is less likely to interac

One means of resolving this question would be to conduct interviews
with the children and ask them directly why no interaction occurred.
Future research questions would be to examine whether there are
links between a child's social network (friends, community) and the
likelihood of seeing known people. Research from the USA (Grannis,
2011) found that trips for children (e.g. to school, to the school bus
stop, etc.) were associated with the creation of community networks.
Are the trips being made by children themselves (i.e. independent
travel) developing and expanding their social networks?
Independent trips had a positive association with seeing known
people in this research and previous work found that CIM was associated 
with creating neighbourhood social capital (Weller and Bruegel,
2009). Further, children's independent mobility (CIM) was also found
to be associated with knowing where to get social interaction (Lim and
Barton, 2010). Thus, from a perspective of child well-being (Pollard and
Lee, 2003; Waygood et al., 2017) independent trips by children are
bene<U+FB01>cial.
Those results suggest that encouraging and facilitating independent
walking by children could increase their community connections. Other
researchers have found a positive link between regularly waving or
talking with neighbours and walking for transport in boys and girls
(Carver et al., 2005). Having such connections can improve parental
con<U+FB01>dence to let children travel independently (Bonner, 1997;
McDonald, 2007b; McDonald et al., 2010), so it would appear to be a
positive feedback cycle. Unfortunately, as has been noted in various
developed countries, children's active and independent travel (to
school) is generally on the decline (Buliung et al., 2009; Grize et al.,
2010; McDonald, 2007a; Shaw et al., 2013; Susilo and Waygood, 2012).

Lastly, the cities in the study were not identical in population size. The
role of the built environment was examined in Waygood and Friman
(2015) in a di<U+FB00>erent area of Japan, but it is not clear whether this
would be the case in Canada or Sweden. Future research could examine
whether di<U+FB00>erences exist for di<U+FB00>erent cities or built environments in
those countries.
A number of questions arise with respect to these <U+FB01>ndings and
current trends. If active travel better supports local connections and
community, and those are associated with higher measures of wellbeing 
such as subjective well-being, then might a decrease in active
travel by children be associated with lower subjective well-being outcomes? 
Or, with modern day technology, is it less important to have
such physical connections when the Internet and other communication
technologies (ICT) facilitate easy social interaction? In a situation
where youth have freedom to travel, some research suggests that ICT is
used to facilitate face-to-face interaction (Kamargianni and
Polydoropoulou, 2014). However, for younger children who might
have more restrictions on their mobility, what might be the role of ICT
for local connections and social interaction? Is it facilitating or substituting? 
There are many questions, and not all of them lend themselves 
to quantitative analysis. Along with other questions related to
noticing or not, interacting or not, qualitative research that allows for
discussion and deeper understanding of these relationships could
greatly improve the knowledge state of these interactions.
The policy implication may be that if a government wishes to support 
healthy and connected communities, it should encourage walking.
Means of encouraging walking include increasing density, land-use mix,
reduced vehicle speed, and addressing psychological barriers. In a review 
of environmental determinants of active travel for children, Panter
et al. (2008) found that social interactions, shorter route length, road
safety, facilities that support active travel, and urban form all were
related to increased active travel. On urban form, increased social interaction 
was depicted by children in more walkable neighbourhoods
(Holt et al., 2008) and community connections were most common in
the most urban areas in a previous study (Waygood and Friman, 2015).
Tra<U+FB03>c calming was found to be consistently associated with both increased 
walking and decreased injuries (Rothman et al., 2014). Walking
school buses are one means of addressing safety and personal security
issues (e.g. Waygood et al., 2015b)) without changing the urban
structure.
The Japanese government speci<U+FB01>cally aims to increase community
cohesion through events such as local festivals (Robertson, 1987).
Further, as mentioned above, people are encouraged to greet others
(aisatsu), which may result in the children being more attentive to those
around them. This research has found that it is more likely for Japanese
children to see a known person during their travels. Obviously, to see
others while travelling between two points, there must be others, so the
high percentage of independent trips by children in Japan likely helps,
though Sweden also had high independent mobility levels, but this was
not re<U+FB02>ected in a high likelihood of seeing a known person. However,
the Swedish children were the most likely to travel by car (Table 1),
thus, it may be the high number of walking trips that explains the
di<U+FB00>erence. Thus, policies that encourage and support walking could
lead to the development of social capital as described by Grannis
(2011). This paper has shown that walking and independent travel are
more associated with seeing known people, which would support previous 
studies linking such behaviour with community relations and
social capital.

6. Conclusions

Seeing a known person may contribute to a sense of community and
increase the perception of safety for the children and their parents, thus
potentially increasing the likelihood of children making independent
trips. Further, those interactions are part of social relationships that are
important for children's well-being. Con<U+FB01>rming previous work, walking

was found to be the mode most associated with seeing a known person
during travel for children aged 10 to 12 in Canada, Japan, and Sweden.
Nearly all children in Japan saw someone they knew during their trips
at least once over a day, for Canada roughly half of the children, and for
Sweden roughly 40%. If having some interaction with that person is
considered, the percentages reduce to 71%, 44%, and 36% for Japan,
Canada, and Sweden respectively. The majority of those interactions
were verbal. Independence was found to play a role in seeing a known
person beyond trips being on foot or by bicycle.