Younger teens’ mode choice for school trips: Do parents’ attitudes toward safety and
traf<U+FB01>c conditions along the school route matter?

abstract
Walking, bicycling, and all other alternative-to-driving modes of transportation used by teenagers promote  
physical activity, which is important for creating a healthy and sustainable community. On the other hand,  
most younger U.S. teens are being driven by their parents to and from school and other activities, which          
gives them fewer opportunities for physical activities. This research investigates factors affecting the mode     
choice of younger teens. The focus of the study is to analyze the effect parents’ views of the safety and               
traf<U+FB01>c conditions along school routes have on younger teens’ mode choice. The study uses the 2009 U.S.           
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS; USDOT, 2009). Younger teens in this study are de<U+FB01>ned as the age              
group from 12 to 16 years old, which is a nondriving, active age group. The results of the study show that
there is a strong correlation between parental attitude and younger teens’ mode choice. Factors that
affect parents’ decisions to drive their teens to and from school include distance between home and
school, traf<U+FB01>c congestion, and crime along school routes.

1. Introduction
										
There is increasing interest in the decisions made about travel              
by parents and children, including the decisions related to                  
mode choice, because they are an important part of a sustainable 
transportation planning process. Walking, bicycling, and                
any other alternative-to-driving modes of transportation used                
by teenage students promote physical activity, which is important 
for creating a healthy and sustainable community. On the                
other hand, parents drive most U.S. teenagers to school and                  
other activities, giving them fewer opportunities for physical               
activities. Empirical evidence suggests that once they have                  
arrived at some given activity, children who were driven were                
less physically active than those who walked or bicycled there               
(Mackett, 2002; Mackett & Paskins, 2004).                                    
Walking and bicycling behavior in the United States has                  
changed drastically over the past several decades. According to              
a study by the U.S. Federal Highway Administration, in 1969                  
about half of all U.S. students walked or biked to school                    
(USDOT-FHA, 1972). Similar studies showed that at the start                  
of the 21st century, fewer than 15% of all school trips are made             
by walking or bicycling, and over half of all children arrive at             
school in private automobiles (USDOT-FHA, 2001). This                        
decline in walking and bicycling has had adverse effects, including 
an increase in the risk for a variety of health problems (USCDC, 2004).                                                                  
Although researchers have studied the travel patterns of                 
adults over the years, there are limited studies on teenagers’               
travel behavior. However, the study of younger teenagers’ physical 
activity (including walking and bicycling) to school is gaining 
important ground as an area of study in several <U+FB01>elds,                   

including child development, public health, sustainability, and
transportation (Campbell, 2007; Darling, 2005; Sener & Bhat,
2011).
Despite the health and social bene<U+FB01>ts of walking and cycling,
fewer and fewer teenagers are walking or bicycling to and from
their school. This is correlated to the various reasons why
parents choose to drive their children to and from school.
According to the U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC), safety
concerns in<U+FB02>uence parents’ attitudes; parents consistently cite
traf<U+FB01>c danger as a reason why their children are unable to bicycle 
or walk to school (US-CDC, 2005). Although there are
objective measures of safety, most parents decide based on perceived 
measures of safety of the travel mode itself, or of the
walking and bicycling environments. If other social and environmental 
factors support the behavior in question, then over
time these perceived negative attitudes may become a lifestyle
(Johansson et al., 2011). Negative perception of the built environment 
(such as safety and traf<U+FB01>c conditions) would then be
associated with reduced levels of walking, bicycling, and other
physical activity (Carver, Salmon, & Campbell, 2005; Carver,
Timperio, & Crawford, 2008). For example, an article published
in the Journal of Preventive Medicine revealed that inner-city
children are engaged in less physical activity than suburban
children because inner-city parents expressed much greater
anxiety about neighborhood safety than suburban parents did.
In the inner-city population, children’s physical activity levels
correlated negatively with parental anxiety about neighborhood
safety (Weir, Etelson, & Brand, 2006).
There is a growing interest in connecting the perceived
measures of the built environment to travel behavior and

physical activity. Behavior analysts agree that the inclusion of
perception and attitude variables in travel behavior analysis,
especially with regard to mode choice, increases the quality of
the estimates and provides a deeper understanding of the
underlying dynamics of the choice process. This is important
because studies on travel behavior usually stress only the complex 
interdependencies between various causes of travel behavior, 
such as sociodemographic variables, urban form, and
transport systems (Holz-Rau & Scheiner, 2010).
Therefore, the purpose of the current study is to analyze
parents’ attitude toward safety and traf<U+FB01>c conditions and its
effect on their younger teenagers’ mode choice, using the 2009
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS). The research
focuses on the nondriving teens because: (a) the maximum age
for the NHTS survey sample for school travel is 16, and (b)
once teenagers reach 16, they often get driver’s licenses and
begin to make independent decisions (Clifton, 2003). That
makes studies on the travel behavior of younger teens between
the ages of 12 and 16 important because mode choice at this
age is decided in part by their parents. Additionally, travel
behavior learned during this age could affect behavior and lifestyles 
in later teenage years and adulthood, thus contributing to
the effort of creating a sustainable transportation system.
This paper consists of seven sections. The second section
presents the literature review, focusing on the power of the attitude 
variable in modeling travel behavior. The third and fourth
sections explain the methodology and data source, respectively.
Sections <U+FB01>ve and six describe the analysis results, focusing on
the effect of attitude and socioeconomic variables on mode
choice. The <U+FB01>nal section describes the study’s conclusion.

2. Previous works

There are a growing number of empirical studies that explain
the effect of attitude on travel behavior, especially mode choice.
Decades ago, most of the research focused on socioeconomic
variables in predicting mode choice. This is evident in the work
of Hartgen (1974), who analyzed the relative strength of socioeconomic 
and attitudinal variables in predicting mode choice.
The result revealed that situational factors (such as socioeconomic 
variable) account for 80%90% of variation explained
by the models, whereas attitudes account for 10%20%. However, 
soon after, Gilbert and Foerster’s (1977) work reported

results re<U+FB02>ecting that attitudinal variables are important in
mode choice decisions and that they can signi<U+FB01>cantly increase
the explanatory power of mode choice models.
Similar researchers agreed that consideration of latent variables, 
such as attitudes, views, perceptions, etc., for the travel
mode choice model increases its explanatory power (Outwater
et al. 2003; Popuri, Proussaloglou, Ayvalik, Koppelman, & Lee,
2011). Analysis of the data from a recent attitudinal survey conducted 
by the Regional Transportation Authority (RTA) in
Northeastern Illinois showed that from a statistical standpoint,
the attitudinal factors improved the intuitiveness and goodness
of <U+FB01>t of the model (Popuri et al. 2011). Outwater et al. (2011)
also argued that inclusion of nontraditional attributes, such as
attitudes, can improve mode choice models and reduce bias
constants. The result of Parkany, Gallagher, and Viveiros
(2004) suggest that behavior processes including attitudes are

better at explaining choices, compared to using only objective
measures to explain behavior.
Although there are several studies on the effect of perception
on mode choice, there are only a few studies on the effect of
parents’ attitudes toward the built environment on their children’s 
travel behavior. The most recent work is by Seraj, Sidharthan, 
Bhat, Pendyala, and Goulias (2012), which analyzes
parental attitudes toward their children’s walking and bicycling
behavior. Although their research focuses on variables that
in<U+FB02>uence parents’ attitude, the effect of parents’ attitude toward
the safety of the walking and bicycling environments on travel
behaviors, especially the mode of travel they choose for their
children, remains unaddressed. Their research focused on
schoolchildren of all ages, and was inspired by previous work
that suggests the presence of strong associations between attitudes 
and travel behavior, which led to theoretical frameworks
describing the underlying reasons for and nature of the associations 
between attitude and behavior (such as Ajzen & Fishbein,
2005 and Van Acker, Wee, & Witlox, 2010). Additionally,
Sener and Baht (2011) used the 2000 San Francisco Bay Area
Travel Survey to analyze the effects of a variety of built environment 
and demographic variables on teenagers’ activity behavior. 
The result indicated that parents’ participation in physical
activity (including walking and bicycling) constitutes the most
important factor in<U+FB02>uencing teenagers’ physical activity participation 
level. This is true for younger teens, because they are
more dependent on their parents’ travel decisions. For example,
Clifton (2003) found that younger teens use alternative modes
such as walking and bicycling at much higher rates than older
teens, but then appear to abandon these more physical modes
as soon as the automobile become an option. Marzoughi
(2010) also had the same results for his sample of the Greater

Toronto Metropolitan area. According to the study, younger
teens tend to walk more and older teens tend to take transit
more, for both school and discretionary travel. The reason for
this, according to the Transportation Research Board (2005),
is that the steady decentralization of metropolitan area populations 
widely dispersed suburban locations, increasing the travel
distance to many destinations, including school. Therefore,
these factors highlight the importance of more studies on younger 
teens’ travel behavior in relation to their environments.

3. Research methods: Binary logit model

The model used in this study is to analyze the effect of parents’
attitude and other sociodemographic variables on mode choice
of younger teens (those that are not eligible for a driver’s
license). Choice models are widely used in economic, marketing, 
transportation, and other <U+FB01>elds to represent the choice of
one from among a set of mutually exclusive alternatives. A multinomial 
model could be the ideal model if there are more than
two available choices. However, the multinomial logit model
(MLM) suffers from certain weaknesses when used in discrete
choice modeling (MLM suffers from independence of irrelevant
alternatives [IIA]), principally when the errors are not independent 
(Greene, 2000). Alternative-speci<U+FB01>c multinomial probit
regression was proposed to possibly relax the independence of
irrelevant alternatives by allowing different error structures;
however, it requires that the data structure be choice-speci<U+FB01>c.

Nested logit model also relaxes the IIA assumption but also
requires the data structure to be choice-speci<U+FB01>c. The NHTS
data set used for this research is respondent-speci<U+FB01>c, therefore,
this study aimed to analyze the mode choice behavior using the
binomial logit model. Although the available alternatives
(mode choices) are more than two, the choices are transformed
into a binary dummy variable such as: car or otherwise (1, 0),
public transit or otherwise (1, 0), and walking/bicycling or otherwise 
(1, 0). It is statistically reliable to create the dummy variables 
because, in the survey, parents got to choose only one
mode of travel among a list of choices.
When travelers are faced with two alternatives (a choice of
speci<U+FB01>c mode [i] over the others [j]), the probability that j is
chosen is equal to [1  P(i)]. The general form of the binomial
logit model is:

The model application is based on the utility theory, which
assumes that the decision maker’s preference for an alternative
is captured by a value called utility (U). The decision maker
selects the alternative in the choice set with the highest utility U
(the chosen mode) D a C bixi
Where:
1. bi is the coef<U+FB01>cient associated with the independent
variables
2. xi is the value of independent variables
3. a is the constant (intercept) estimated by the model
The estimation of the equation’s parameters (intercepts and
beta coef<U+FB01>cients) rests upon a method called maximum likelihood 
(ML). ML basically assumes that the underlying relationship 
between any independent variables and the dichotomous
dependent variable (Y) follows a probability function (also
called likelihood function). Several computer programs are
available to handle the logistic regression model, and in this
study we used LIMDEP V-9, econometric software developed
by Econometric Software, Inc.

3.1 Goodness of <U+FB01>t

Several indicators are available for assessing goodness of <U+FB01>t of a
given logistic regression model. Some of them are maximum
likelihood ratio, Chi square, X2, and Pseudo R2. In the ordinary
least square context, the coef<U+FB01>cient of determination (R2) has
an interesting property of providing an indicator of how well a
set of independent variables explain the variance observed in
the dependent variable (Draper & Smith, 1981). In logistic
regression, the Pseudo R2 represents the proportion of error
variance that an alternative hypothesis reduces in relation to a
null hypothesis. The recommended formula for Pseudo R2 is:

where X2 is the Chi-square statistics for overall <U+FB01>t of the
model, and N is the total sample size. The Pseudo R2 ranges
from 0 to 1.

4. Data

Mode choice is a binary variable (created as the dummy variable 
of choosing a speci<U+FB01>c mode or not), which is considered a
dependent variable. The travel mode chosen for trips to and
from school in the survey were split into three categories: personal 
vehicle, public transit, and walk/bike. “Other” is treated
as a reference variable, so results show only the three modes.
The <U+FB01>ve-point Likert-scale attitude toward the prede<U+FB01>ned <U+FB01>ve
issues (attributes) associated with the safety and traf<U+FB01>c condition 
of the school route, along with socioeconomic and demographic 
variables, were considered as independent variables.
The sample data is taken from the National Household Travel
Survey (NHTS) by sorting and <U+FB01>ltering the attitude and mode
choice variables for school-related trips. NHTS is one of the
most prominent telephone surveys run by the U.S. Department
of Transportation, and is conducted periodically to assess the
mobility of the American public. The 2009 NHTS is a nationally 
representative survey of travel behavior conducted from
April 2008 through April 2009. There is a separate section in
the survey that deals with school travel only, in which parents
were interviewed about their children’s travel characteristics to
and from school. The minimum age was identi<U+FB01>ed as 5, and
the maximum was 16. For the purpose of this study, the 12 to
16 age group is considered (it is notable that the preteen age of
12 is included), because the focus of this study is on young
teens’ travel behavior. The information about children’s travel
characteristics is based on their parents’ response to the survey.
The survey includes latent responses on how parents view various 
aspects of the safety and traf<U+FB01>c conditions along school
routes. On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means “not an issue” and 5
means “a serious issue,” parents were asked how much each of
the <U+FB01>ve attributes of the walking and bicycling environments
affected their decision to allow their children to walk or bike to
or from school. The <U+FB01>ve attributes are:
1. Parents’ attitude toward crime along the route between
home and school,
2. Parents’ attitude toward school distance along the route
between home and school,
3. Parents’ attitude toward traf<U+FB01>c speed along the route
between home and school,
4. Parents’ attitude toward traf<U+FB01>c amount along the route
between home and school, and
5. Parents’ attitude toward the weather condition in the
school area.
Although the effect of parental attitude on mode choice is
the main focus of this study, some socioeconomic and demographic 
variables were also added, as presented in Table 1. At
the start of the analysis several variables that comprise household 
and parents’ characteristics were included in the model.
However, the inclusion of several variables results in important
variables yielding statistically insigni<U+FB01>cant results (due to collinearity). 
So ultimately, variables presented in Table 1 are
included in the model.

5. Results: Descriptive

A descriptive analysis, as presented in Figure 1, shows that the
majority of younger teens are driven to school. There are also a

signi<U+FB01>cant number of school trips made by public transit
(including the school bus). Only a few of the trips to and/or
from school are made by walking or biking. The walking/biking
issues that concern parents the most are: school distance, the
speed of traf<U+FB01>c along the school way, and the amount of traf<U+FB01>c
along school routes. Crime and weather are the least of their
concerns, according to the descriptive result (Figure 2).
Figures 3 through 5 describe the difference between trips to
and from school in mode choice vis-a-vis parents’ attitude

toward the safety and traf<U+FB01>c conditions along the routes to
school. Although there is no signi<U+FB01>cant difference in mode
choice and attitude pattern between trips to and from school,
the graphs show that there is a slight variation in parents’ attitude 
for these trips in terms of the mode they choose for their
younger teens. Following the general trend exhibited in
Figure 2, three issues, namely distance between home and
school, traf<U+FB01>c speed, and the amount of traf<U+FB01>c along the school
route, are very important for parents who drive their children
to and from school. Those concerns are also identi<U+FB01>ed in
parents that let their children use public transportation.
6. Results: Binomial logit model
The binary logit model is used to examine the effect of
parents’ attitudes and the socioeconomic variables on mode
choice. Tables 2 and 3 represent the beta weights and the
corresponding p values as statistical hypothesis tests, with
the purpose of determining the relationship between a set of
independent variables (parental attitude and socioeconomic)
and the dependent variable (mode choice). The sign associated 
with the beta coef<U+FB01>cient indicates the direction of the
effect that a particular independent variable has on the
dependent variable. The positive sign with the attitude variables 
can be interpreted in such a way that regardless of their

concerns, parents use the mode they choose (e.g., driving) to
transport their children (or those attitude variables don’t
deter them from using the mode). The negative sign means
there is an inverse relationship between the attitude (as well
as other sociodemographic variables) and mode choice. The
statistical signi<U+FB01>cance of the relationships is captured based
on the p value. As shown in Tables 2 and 3, all the variables
with a p value of <0.05 were found to exert a signi<U+FB01>cant
effect on mode choice. The rest of the variables indicated by
an asterisk have no signi<U+FB01>cant effect on the mode choice.
The likelihood ratio, the chi square, and Pseudo R2 were
used as goodness-of-<U+FB01>t measures. For example, in the case of
private vehicle use (columns 2 and 3 of Tables 2 and 3), the
corresponding Pseudo R2 D 0.1 indicates that the model
accounts for a 10% reduction in error variance. Although it

seems small, the other goodness-of-<U+FB01>t measures (such as the
chi square), indicate that the mode best <U+FB01>ts the data.

6.1 The effect of parental attitude variable on younger
teens mode choice

6.1.1 Private vehicle

All of the attitude variables show a signi<U+FB01>cant effect on the
choice of a private vehicle for a trip to school. Attitude
toward distance, traf<U+FB01>c speed, and weather have negative
beta coef<U+FB01>cients. This shows their inverse relationship with
the choice of private vehicle. Therefore, parents’ negative
views on distance, traf<U+FB01>c speed, and weather have a lesser
effect on the likelihood of younger teens to be driven to
school by their parents than parents’ views on other
Table 3. The in<U+FB02>uence of attitude and other variables on mode choice FROM

attributes. On the other hand, traf<U+FB01>c congestion and crime
along the school route is positively related to the choice of
private transportation, showing that the reason parents drive
their younger teens to school could likely be their perception 
of crime and the amount of traf<U+FB01>c along the school
route. For the trip from school, most of the attitude variables 
are not statistically signi<U+FB01>cant with p values of >0.05,
except in the case of crime, which has a positive relationship. 
When parents think that crime might be an issue for
walking and bicycling, they tend to drive their younger teens
for trips from school. Figure 6 shows the sensitivity of the
effect of attitude on mode choice. According to the analysis
results, the probability of the use of private car decreases
with an increase in parents’ concern with distance and traf<U+FB01>c speed.

6.1.2 Public transit

Parents’ attitude toward distance and traf<U+FB01>c amount (congestion) 
are the two variables with no signi<U+FB01>cant effect on choosing 
public transit as a means of travel for younger teens. Crime,
one of the statistically signi<U+FB01>cant variables, is negatively related
to public transit choice, meaning parents who view crime as a
serious issue have less likelihood of letting their younger teens
use public transit (including school buses). The traf<U+FB01>c speed
and the weather did not appear to deter parents from letting
their younger teens use public transit (refer to Figure 7 for the
sensitivity analysis results). The model yielded similar results
for trips from school.

6.1.3 Walk/bicycle

The only variable statistically insigni<U+FB01>cant for the mode “walk/
bicycle” is parents’ attitude toward traf<U+FB01>c speed along the
school route (p value of 0.58). Parents’ attitude toward distance
and traf<U+FB01>c congestion are negatively related with walking and
bicycling to school. This means that the longer the distance
between home and school, and the more congested the roads
are, the less likely the children are to walk or bicycle to school.
Interestingly, weather conditions in the school/residence area
also related to a smaller likelihood of walking and bicycling to
school. Parents’ attitude toward school crime seems to have no
effect on young teen’s decisions regarding walking or bicycling
to school (Fig. 8). The model yielded somewhat similar results
for the trip from school.


6.2 The effect of socioeconomic variables on younger
teens’ mode choice

All the socioeconomic and demographic variables included
in the model have a signi<U+FB01>cant effect on mode choice except
for a few variables indicated with an asterisk in Tables 2 and
3. The overall direction of correlation is the same for trips to
and from school, showing that there is no signi<U+FB01>cant variation 
in the trip pattern for trips to and from school. Gender
is one of the predictor variables, in that male students are
less likely to be driven to and from school than female students. 
However, male students are more likely to use public
transit and walk or bicycle. Household income is a statistically 
signi<U+FB01>cant variable; higher income relates to the higher
likelihood of driving younger teens to and from school, and
a lower probability of using public transit. However, income
appeared to have no effect on biking and walking choices,
with a p value of >0.05. The higher the size of the household, 
the lower the likelihood of being driven, and the higher
the probability of using public transit or walking/bicycling.
The number of drivers and numbers of vehicles in the household 
positively related to being driven to and from school,
while negatively correlating with public transit use and walking and cycling.
Although the subjective measure of distance is negatively
correlated with the choice of private car, the results on the
objective measure of distance show that the further apart the
school and homes are, the higher the probability of being

driven to school and of using public transit. Distance is also
an impeding factor for walking and bicycling to and from
school.
Public school students are less likely to be driven by their
parents, and more likely to use public transit, and walk or bicycle. 
The size of the urban area where the homes and schools are
located seems to have no effect on the public transit choice.
However, the densely populated areas are related to a smaller
likelihood of being driven and a greater likelihood of walking
or bicycling.

7. Conclusion

Several studies agreed that walking and bicycling as well as
using public transportation are sustainable modes of travel that
encourage healthy living. Particularly, less driving to school is
crucial for the development of the younger teen’s personal
health. However, it is apparent that more and more parents
drive their children to school, even over short distances. When
talking about sustainable transportation, the mode choice of
younger teens in getting around is often overlooked. Thus, this
research contributes to the limited body of literature on younger 
teens’ travel patterns by studying the effect of parents’ attitudes 
and other socioeconomic and demographic variables on
their children’s transportation. Because parents are the ones
who most often choose a mode for their younger teens, understanding 
their decision process is important. Although there is
a vast body of literature on the effect of attitude on mode
choice, parental attitude as a proxy independent variable and
its effect on children’s travel behavior has not been assessed in
previous empirical works. Additionally, even though the travel
behavior of adults is a widely researched topic, when it comes
to mobility patterns, teenagers—especially the younger ones—
are an understudied demographic. Teens do not have the
same needs, demand patterns, or freedom of choice as working
adults. Therefore, the modeling, as well as the descriptive
results of the study, provides signi<U+FB01>cant insight into the travel
behavior of younger teens and setting goals to achieve a more
sustainable society. A sustainable approach for transportation
planning requires that from a young age children adopt positive
environmental values that in<U+FB02>uence their own decisions when
they become adults.
The results of this study show that parents’ attitude has a
signi<U+FB01>cant effect on transportation decisions, and that younger

teens’ mode choice can be a function of their parents’ view of
the safety and traf<U+FB01>c conditions. For example, a parental attitude 
about distance between home and school is one of the
major factors that explains whether children are driven to
school. In this study, the attitude variable (subjective measure
of distance) is supported by the actual distance (as objective
measure), showing that although parents perceive that distance
has less effect on their decision to drive their younger teens,
the actual distance indicates that it is the most important factor
in parental decisions. Therefore, distance between home and
school plays a signi<U+FB01>cant role in discouraging younger teens
from walking or bicycling to school. It is true that in most metropolitan 

areas, the distance between home and school is great.
Also, in areas where the walking and cycling environments are
not appealing, the shorter distance may seem longer in parents’
or students’ minds. This research also shows the in<U+FB02>uence of
parents’ attitude toward traf<U+FB01>c congestion and, even more
important, crime on the mode choice of younger teens.
The indicator variables identi<U+FB01>ed in this paper will be useful
to planners and policymakers, allowing them to identify the
travel demand of younger teens and aiding them in developing
appropriate plans and policies. In addition, the research makes
empirical, conceptual, and methodological contributions such
as incorporating attitude variables into mode choice models.
There are limitations to this research that require a careful
interpretation of the results. For example, aggregate (national)
data is used for the analysis, although different cities have different 
land use, public transportation availability, sidewalks
and bike lanes, etc., which can affect parents’ attitude. Although
the NHTS data sample for each state or city is small, further
research looking into the effect of parents’ attitude on children’s 
mode choice for different geographical and social settings
is important. Also, the trips considered for the analysis are trips
to and from school, while students travel patterns for after-school
programs could be different and require a separate analysis. 
In addition, the in<U+FB02>uence of working couples on their
teenage children’s travel patterns (Loo & Lam, 2013) should be
considered when further investigating the issue of school trips.