Integrating Parental Attitudes in Research
on Children’s Active School Commuting
Evidence from Community School Travel Survey

Current active research on school travel emphasizes travel distance and
neighborhood walkability as major environmental conditions affecting
the occurrences of children walking or biking to school. The impacts of
parental travel attitudes on children’s school travel behavior remain
understudied. This paper outlines a conceptual framework that incorporates 
the relationships of attitudes, environment conditions, and
children’s walking or biking to school. The framework recognizes the
predictive power that attitudinal factors have for children’s walking or
biking to school; the framework also highlights the moderating effects of
parental travel attitudes on the predictive power of some environment conditions. 
By using data (1,197 cases) from a school travel survey conducted
in a midsized school district in Oregon, this paper reports that parental
attitudes toward walking or biking to school and car use are significant 
explanatory variables in models predicting occurrence of children
walking or biking to school when the models control for important
environmental variables. The analysis also reveals that important built
environment variables—travel distance to school and neighborhood
walkability—exhibit varying levels of impacts on the probability of
children walking or biking to school when parents demonstrate different 
attitudes toward active school commuting and car use. The paper
discusses implications of the research findings for the challenges facing
Safe Routes to School Programs and explores approaches that can make
these programs more effective.

Over the past 40 years, the United States has witnessed a precipitous 
decline in the rate of active school transportation (walking and
biking) among all student age groups (1, 2). According to the 2001
National Household Travel Survey, about 65% of all children arrive
at school via private automobiles compared with 18% in 1969 (3). In
some communities, school trips account for 10% of all short trips and
close to 30% of morning peak traffic (4). Similar trends have been
documented in other nations (5, 6).
Increased reliance on private automobiles for school travel has
raised concerns about negative environmental impacts (3) and possible 
adverse health impacts on children (7–9). The increase in automobile 
use has coincided with decreasing physical activity and rising
obesity rates among children; many authors have suggested that the
three phenomena are related (10).
Increasing the rate of children walking or biking to school, or active
school commuting (ASC), has become an important national health
objective. Federal and state transportation and public health agencies
have promoted programs such as Safe Routes to School (SRTS) and
campaigns such as Kids Walk to School in an effort to increase ASC.
Many of these efforts have focused on road safety education, urban
form improvements (e.g., closing sidewalk gaps), and enforcing traffic 
rules around schools (11). Evidence of the effectiveness of these
interventions has been limited and mixed (11–14), and some has been
less than encouraging (15, 16).
Successful and sustained strategies to increase ASC require a
thorough understanding of people’s decision-making processes. To
gain such understanding involves consideration of not only attributes
of environmental conditions necessary to support ASC (e.g., safe
walking routes) but also of decision-makers’ attitudes, preferences,
and other psychological variables (17, 18). However, current and
past programs, interventions, and academic research have primarily
focused on environmental factors (e.g., street connectivity), which
mainly serve as barriers to ASC. Theoretical frameworks developed 
to analyze ASC do not appear to have fully integrated many
psycho­logical factors with other environmental and social influences
(19–21). In a recent comprehensive literature review of research on
school travel, Sirard and Slater noted that prominent psychological
constructs, such as attitudes, beliefs, and social norms, have not been
explored sufficiently in the literature (10).
Here, research in social psychology will be drawn upon to expand
the ASC literature and explore the role psychological factors play in
affecting parents’ school travel decision making. The psychological
variables to be focused on include parents’ attitudes toward ASC and
toward car use, which are conceptualized and measured separately.
The degree to which attitudinal and environmental variables directly
affect the likelihood of ASC are examined, as are possible inter­
actions between the two sets of factors. By using survey data from
a community sample, an attempt is made to answer the following
research questions:

1. What is the unique predictive power of parental attitudes beyond

the effects of environmental variables in the context of ASC?
2. How are the effects of environmental variables moderated by
parental attitudes?

This study contributes to the literature about ASC both theoretically 
and empirically. The current dominant ASC framework is
expanded by integrating an important and previously understudied

component of parents’ decision-making processes. Critically, this
approach conceives ASC as a behavioral domain that requires strong
motivation but is greatly constrained by environmental conditions.
This empirical study offers evidence underscoring the limitations of
interventions focused solely on physical environment improvements.

Factors Affecting School Travel
Behavior: A Review

Existing literature on school travel has identified a number of factors 
that have impacts on ASC (10). These factors constitute four
primary domains: built environment, social environment, school
characteristics, and family–household characteristics.

Built Environment

Objectively measured or subjectively perceived, two built environmental 
factors have thus far received the most attention: home–school
distance and neighborhood walkability. Greater distance between a
student’s residence and the school is a primary barrier to ASC: children 
are more likely to walk if they live within 1 mi of school (2, 3, 6,
19, 20, 22, 23). Walkability of the environment close to school (e.g.,
street connectivity) also correlates with ASC (23, 24), although the
effect is often found to be smaller than that of distance (25, 26). Urban
form elements believed to affect walkability include housing density,
sidewalk connectivity, street connectivity, road type and function,
and street tree coverage (11, 23, 27).

Social Environment

Local social conditions, including (perceived) crime rates, child safety,
and neighborhood cohesion–support, may affect parents’ decisions
about letting their children take part in physical activities within their
communities (2, 28). Perceived crime danger is a major barrier to ASC
(23, 24, 29), and stronger social cohesion–control increases the likelihood 
of ASC, particularly for those living within 1 mi of school (2).
Various proxy measures of neighborhood social conditions, such as
socioeconomic characteristics (e.g., neighborhood household income,
poverty levels, and occupational makeup), have also been found to
correlate with ASC (2, 27).

School Characteristics

Some school characteristics have also received attention. For example, 
school type (magnet versus neighborhood) has an effect on the
likelihood of ASC (26, 30): attending neighborhood schools is associated 
with higher probability of ASC. Several studies have considered
the effects of school size on travel behavior, although findings appear
inconclusive (27, 31). School policies (e.g., rules about s­ tudent
drop-off and pick-up) may also affect ASC (29).


Family–Household Characteristics

Some family–household characteristics, such as number of cars
owned, number of licensed drivers, and higher household income,
appear to be associated with greater likelihood of automobile use for
school trips (6, 27). Children’s own characteristics (e.g., ­physiological
adequacy) also appear to play a role, although reported effects of gender 
and age are mixed (10). Other family characteristics, ­including
race–ethnicity, also show mixed results.


Parent Psychological Characteristics

Understudied components of the family–household characteristics
category are parents’ preferences and travel attitudes. Attitudes,
preferences, intentions, beliefs, values, and norms are prominent
constructs employed in theories of intentional behavior (32, 33).
Recent studies that have considered people’s environmental attitudes
and travel mode preferences have provided evidence for the causal
relationship between attitudes, preferences, and travel behavior (34).
Findings from these studies also tend to qualify environmental impacts
on travel behavior. For example, Bagley and Mokhtarian suggest that,
when attitudes and preferences are controlled, e­ nvironmental factors
show little residual effect on travel mode choice (35).
Although the relations of some of these constructs with travel
behavior have been considered within the broader literature on travel
behavior (18), research on school travel has not paid sufficient attention 
to psychological variables. The number of school travel studies
that have included psychological variables in their analyses is limited 
(19, 36–42), and even fewer have sufficiently operationalized
measures of these variables. Moreover, possible interactions between
psychological and environmental factors have been mostly ignored.
In one of the few studies that have explored such variables, Black
et al. examined the effects of parents’ attitudes toward car use on
school travel decision making (19). By using a series of attitudinal
statements, they identified three “value orientations” underlying parents’ 
car-use attitudes: environmental awareness, car-centeredness,
and individual responsibility. Among the three dimensions that they
identified, car-centeredness exhibited the strongest impact on school
travel behavior. Similarly, McMillan reported that caregivers’ beliefs
about the convenience of driving and in the value of children’s social
interaction along the journey to school had impacts on children’s
ASC (36). Rodriguez and Vogt explored children’s attitudes toward
ASC among a sample of elementary students in Michigan (38). The
authors used semantic differential scales (e.g., fun–boring, safe–not
safe) to measure a limited set of attitudes toward walking to school
and found small but significant positive effects of safety attitudes and
walking-saves-time beliefs on ASC, after controlling for a variety of
environmental, demographic, and access factors.
Few studies have explored interactions between psychological
and environmental factors. Panter et al. examined how environmental 
factors moderated the relationship between ASC and parents’ caruse 
convenience attitudes (37). They found that the attitude–ASC
relationship was stronger for individuals who lived within 1 km of
school than for those who lived farther away (37). They also found
that the relationship between parents’ safety concerns and ASC
was stronger for families who lived farther away from school. The
moderation findings from this study are important from a transportation 
policy perspective because they suggest that soft factors such
as parental attitudes and perceptions of safety matter to differing
extents in relation to environmental factors.
The apparent low level of interest in investigating these psycho­
logical constructs within the walking-to-school context may be
attributable to the difficulty in operationalizing psychological
concepts and the lack of an integrating conceptual framework that
clearly recognizes their role in affecting ASC. In addition, the perceived 
lack of policy relevance of psychological constructs has


likely resulted in weak enthusiasm in adopting those concepts in
analysis. The next section provides a definition of “attitude” that
bears policy relevance and establishes a conceptual framework that
integrates attitudes in research on school travel.


Parental Behavioral Attitudes and ASC:
A Conceptual Framework

Defining Behavioral Attitudes

Behavioral attitudes reflect how much an individual is in favor of
or against performing a given behavior. A frequently used method
to measure behavioral attitudes is to infer them on the basis of “a
person’s positive or negative evaluation of performing the ­behavior”
(43, p. 6). The development of an attitude toward a behavior is
shaped both by internal factors (e.g., previous experience) and external 
ones (e.g., the environment in which one lives). Internal factors
pertain to one’s own judgment about benefits and costs associated
with performing a behavior; they can also include perceived collective 
consequences and self-ascribed responsibility for social or
environmental consequences. The second factor that can shape one’s
behavioral attitude involves an individual’s perceived support for
performing the behavior and perceived social pressure to do so. In
other words, attitudes are shaped by a person’s deliberate calculation
as well as by situational facilitators, barriers he or she perceives, or
both (44, 45).
Individuals’ assessment of behavioral consequences may be amenable 
to change via education-oriented interventions. In light of
findings that suggest education has effects on people’s awareness
of environmental problems and their attitudes toward environmentally 
relevant behavior and policies (e.g., recycling), it is reasonable
to speculate that people’s attitudes toward a travel behavior may
change if they obtain more information about the consequences associated 
with that behavior (46). Furthermore, the situation-dependent
component of parental attitudes may become amenable to policy
instruments only when substantial changes occur in much broader
social, physical, and institutional contexts. This component, while
a difficult target from a policy perspective, may serve to qualify the
effectiveness of policy implementations.
It is necessary to make a distinction between attitudes as they are
defined here and other subjectively measured variables, such as environmental 
perceptions (e.g., perceived safety concerns), that have
received consideration in existing travel behavior analyses. The former
construct is considered as capturing people’s general feeling toward
performing a behavior, whereas the latter constructs pertain in one
way or another to subjective recognition and interpretation of sensory
stimuli chiefly derived from the physical or social environments (47).
Two domains of parental attitudes likely important in the ASC
behavioral context were examined: attitudes toward ASC and attitudes 
toward car use. [In the case of school travel of young children
(e.g., kindergarten to Grade 5), it was anticipated that parents’ attitudes 
have significant impacts on their decision to choose active
school travel modes for their children and assumed that decisions
to commute actively are made primarily by parents.] Parents’ attitudes 
toward ASC are likely shaped by multiple meanings attached
to ASC that go beyond school travel. These meanings are likely to
involve environmental ones, as suggested by recent research that
looks at commute mode choices as environmentally relevant decision 
making (18, 48). Other meanings may be attached to ASC that
make it a desired behavior for its own sake, for example, a belief

that ASC could increase a child’s physical activity or that ASC
accompanied by a parent represents quality time spent together.
Parents’ attitudes toward car use were measured because they may
play a unique role in explicating children’s school travel behavior.
People’s beliefs about the benefits and advantages associated with
owning and using automobiles, as well as their environmental concerns 
or lack thereof, can determine car ownership and the level of
automobile use (48, 49). Recent studies also highlight that the level
of car dependence (as a psychological condition), which is shaped by
a person’s perceived norm of frequent car use and perceived lack of
choice of alternative means, has stronger impacts on automobile use
than variables such as access to cars and to alternative t­ ransportation
means (50).

Parental Attitudes and Children’s ASC

The authors conceptualize ASC here as a behavior that requires
strong internal motivation and postulate that parents’ decisions to use
ASC are directly affected by the balance between a desire for ASC
and a tendency to use cars. At the same time, by recognizing ASC as a
strongly environmentally constrained behavior, the authors acknowledge 
the effects of environmental factors such as travel distance and
neighborhood walkability on the use of ASC and suggest that parents’
attitudes condition the effects of those environmental factors (10).
Further, the authors hypothesize that, when parents’ ASC attitudes
are particularly weak, the occurrences of ASC are unlikely to be
induced by supportive environment conditions alone. Within this
sort of psychological context, environmental variables may have
little impact on ASC. By contrast, when ASC attitudes are strong,
parents may become responsive to environmental conditions, and
supportive environmental qualities (e.g., shorter travel distance,
better walkability) could induce greater likelihood of ASC. Caruse 
attitudes, by contrast, likely have opposite moderating effects
on the environment–behavior relationship. In a highly pro-car or
car-dependent context, the occurrence of ASC is likely to be suppressed 
regardless of environmental supportiveness. The authors
also hypothesize that, in contexts in which car-use attitudes are less
predominant, the relationship between environmental conditions and
ASC likely becomes stronger. These hypotheses are tested through
surveys of parents of children of elementary school age in Oregon.

Research Design and Methodology

Study Area

The study area was the 4J school district in Lane County, Oregon.
This school district spans 155 mi2 in the southern Willamette V   ­ alley
and mainly serves the city of Eugene, Oregon. Twenty-six elementary 
schools in this district enrolled approximately 6,000 students
in the 2007–2008 academic year. Among these schools, 18 were
neighborhood schools with a defined service zone (catchment area–
assignment district) and eight were so-called alternative schools that
house certain special programs (e.g., foreign language education,
art, or music curriculum). The school district has an open enrollment 
policy that allows a student living in the district to attend any
desired school through a lottery process, provided space is available
(see Figure 1).
The study area possesses some characteristics that are useful for
revealing interactions between attitudinal factors and environmental

factors with respect to their effects on ASC. Eugene is known for
active outdoor activities and good infrastructure for biking and walking. 
Eugene has an extensive bicycle path network. Other environmental 
facilitators of active commuting, such as sidewalks, traffic
calming, and crosswalks, are considered well developed in this city.
Compared with people in many other places in this country, residents
of Eugene appear to view physical activity as more normative. This
suggests that reasonably good variation can be seen in the strength of
ASC attitudes and pro-car attitudes as well as generally supportive
environmental conditions for walking and biking. All of these elements 
are necessary to allow the manifestation of attitude–behavior
and environment–behavior relationships.

School Travel Survey

A mail survey was conducted in late April 2008 to 5,700 households 
with children attending elementary schools (kindergarten
to Grade 5) in the 4J school district and residing within the city
boundaries of Eugene. The survey included questions about children’s 
school travel behavior similar to those used in other studies
and national SRTS programs (23). The survey also included questions 
tapping parents’ attitudes, their perceptions of environmental
conditions, and household sociodemographic information. Parents
were instructed to complete the survey for their eldest elementary
school child if more than one child in the household was attending
elementary school.

Measures

ASC Data Collection

Parents reported the number of days that their child traveled to and
from school by using different transportation means during a typical
school week. The days that a child walked or biked to school were
then combined into one measure of the frequency of using ASC.
The authors believe that this frequency is a better measure of ASC

than are measures based on the occurrence of ASC on or before the
day a survey is taken (e.g., National Household Travel Survey) or
on parents’ self-identification of the travel means used on most days
of a week (e.g., parent surveys conducted by the SRTS program). A
recent study by Bere and Bjørkelund showed that a questionnaire
with an almost-identical design as the one used here had high reliability 
on the self-reported frequencies of different school travel
means used (51).

Attitudes

A series of questions were used to assess the two attitudinal constructs: 
attitude toward ASC and attitude toward car use. For
ASC attitudes, parents reported their level of agreement with
seven statements pertaining to various outcomes associated with
­walking–biking in general and to school. These outcomes, such as
increased physical activity, a less automobile-dependent lifestyle,
and increased opportunity for children to know their environments,
are those frequently discussed in the literature as reasons for promoting 
ASC. Items related to the consequences of automobile travel
for school trips (such as traffic congestion and air pollution) were
also included. Parental attitudes toward car use were assessed with
another seven items that elicited parents’ agreement with various
outcomes associated with car use, such as comfort and convenience,
and their assessment of their general car dependence, such as lack
of alternative options.
Development of these questions was informed by several recent
studies that have made an explicit effort to analyze the independent
influence of attitudes on travel behavior (19, 52). All items were tested
for semantic clarity. (Interviews were conducted with parents to test
the clarity of the survey questions. The surveys were tested on six parents 
before being distributed.) All attitudinal questions were assessed
on a five-point Likert scale (response choices: 1 = strongly disagree,
2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, and 5 = strongly agree). The
14 items were subjected to factor analysis to verify that they indeed
tapped two distinct attitudinal domains. All items are ­presented in the
later section on attitude measures.

Environmental Variables

This study focused on physical–environmental variables. These variables 
include two measures that are based on parents’ perceptions—
travel distance and neighborhood walkability—and a geographic
information system–based measure of street connectivity (percentage 
of four-way street intersections) for a quarter-mile area around a
school site. [A number of other urban form measures, including housing 
density, land use mix, and road network density, were also created.
The street connectivity measure was ultimately chosen because it had
the weakest correlation with other variables included in the models. It
is also a measure suggested as having statistically significant impacts
on school travel mode choice by past research (23).] These variables
have been examined in past studies and are considered important
urban-form indicators with significant impacts on ASC. Although the
travel distance and neighborhood walkability variables are not direct
measures of objective environmental characteristics, the variables
are indicative of the environmental conditions that can better predict 
active school travel. The geographic information system–based
indicators were used to verify the reliability of some of the measures.
Use of the subjective measures of the environment is consistent with
the attitude theories developed in social psychology that the outside
world affects a behavior mainly through an individual’s perception of
environment conditions (53). However, their predictive power has not
been examined in relation to parents’ attitudes.

Control Variables

The set of control variables included those pertaining to school characteristics 
and nonpsychological household and child characteristics
(e.g., demographics). School characteristics considered involved
school type (neighborhood school versus choice school) and size of
school enrollment. Household sociodemographic variables included
household income, employment status, education levels, race–­ethnicity
of adults in households, and number of cars owned. Child characteristics 
included a child’s age. Some of the control variables were not
maintained in the final models reported in later sections on the effects
of variables because of multicollinearity issues.

Analysis

Factor analyses were conducted to assess the internal consistency of
the multiple-item attitudinal measures. Then, two composite measures 
were created by averaging the most reliable items (six for
ASC, five for car use). To test the hypotheses, stratified logistic

multiple regression analyses were performed; the analyses allowed
examination of how the effect of the environmental variables might
differ by parental attitudes toward ASC and car use.

Results

Sample Descriptive Findings of Major Variables

A total of 5,700 surveys were mailed. After discounting 126 non­
deliverables, 1,197 surveys were returned, a 22% response rate,
which is similar to other surveys recently conducted throughout a
school district for school travel research (30). A comparison of several 
sociodemographic and housing characteristics of the sample
with those of the population suggests that the survey response is
reasonably representative of the study population. Imputed from the
survey was information that the median family income was $62,500
in 2008, or comparable to the median family income ($60,157)
for Eugene families with dependent children reported in the 2008
American community survey. In the sample, 22% of children were
from nonwhite families and 75% lived in owner-occupied housing,
compared with the corresponding percentages of 29% and 74%,
respectively, from school district data.
In the sample, about 32.9% of the children walked or biked to
school at least 1 day a week, 13.5% at least 3 days a week, and 8.8%
every day. The corresponding percentages for children who walked
or biked when leaving school are similar, being 42.6%, 13.0%, and
7.7%, respectively (Table 1). The predominant mode of school
travel was by private automobile. More than 60% of children in
the sample rode cars (including car pools) to school at least 3 days
a week; more than half the children rode a car to school every day.
The analysis that follows focuses only on morning travel to school.

Attitude Measures

Table 2 reports results from the factor analysis (which used oblique
rotation). None of the items showed a cross loading above .4. Eleven
items loaded on their predicted factor above .5 and were retained
for creating the two composite measures. A single measure of ASC
attitudes was computed by taking the mean of six retained items.
The reliability for this six-item measure of ASC attitudes is acceptable 
(Cronbach’s a = .76; mean interitem correlation = .35). Use of
the mean value as opposed to the factor scores makes interpretation
of the attitude measure easier: values below 3 on the measure indicate
a relatively negative (or weak) attitude toward ASC; values between
3 and 4 a slightly favorable attitude; and values above 4 ­indicate a

strong, positive attitude. Similarly, a single measure of attitudes                           
toward car use was constructed by taking the mean of five items
(a = .71, mean interitem correlation = .38). The two attitude measures                        
were m ­ oderately and negatively correlated [r (1,109) = -0.22, p < .01].                    
Table 3 reports mean scores on the attitudinal measures as a function 
of parental educational achievement. The mean differences                                
among the three groups, although small in magnitude, are indicative                           
of the fact that higher educational achievement is related to stronger                        
beliefs about the positive health and environmental consequences                              
associated with ASC. This contrast is particularly evident between                            
parents with a postgraduate degree and those without a bachelor’s                             
degree. However, the agreement levels toward the statements related                           
to car-use attitudes do not seem to correlate with parental ­educational                      
levels as strongly in that few significant ­differences emerged.                             

Correlations Between Key Variables

Table 4 reports correlations between the attitude measures and the
environmental measures on which the study focused. The purpose of
examining correlations between these measures is to verify whether
parents’ internal desire or motivations to use ASC or cars are associated 
with the environmental conditions they face. The weak correlations 
between the attitude measures and the environmental measures
suggest that parents’ attitudes toward ASC and car use are somewhat
independent of the environmental characteristics of their residence.
All correlation coefficients are in the expected direction. The distance 
measure has the strongest correlation with the frequency of
ASC, as expected. (It was possible to geocode and to compute distance 
for 780 cases. The authors decided against using the ­geographic

information system measure in subsequent analyses because of the
smaller sample size.) The correlations between the two attitudinal
measures and ASC frequency are of similar magnitude.

Direct Effects of Attitude Variables
on ASC Behavior

A series of logistic models were run to test the primary hypotheses
about the direct effects of the attitudinal predictors of ASC. Logistic
regressions were used because of the highly skewed distribution of
ASC frequency, which led to dichotomizing the outcome variable.
Tested separately were the additional effects of attitudinal measures
on the likelihood of using ASC at two frequencies (at least 1 day a

week and at least 3 days a week); those tests controlled for environmental 
and household characteristics.
The results from the full-sample models are reported in Table 5. The
addition of attitudinal variables increases the explanatory power of the
models significantly. In Models A.1 and A.2, predicting ASC at least
1 day a week, the Nagelkerke R2 increased from .171 to .214 after the
two attitude variables were included; reduction in the -2 log likelihood
was statistically significant after the two variables were included. The
improvement is similar for Models B.1 and B.2, predicting weekly
occurrence of ASC at a higher level (at least 3 days a week).
By comparing Models A and Models B, Table 5 shows that the
important environmental and attitudinal variables have greater effects
on the high-frequency ASC measure. For prediction of ASC at least
1 day a week, a 1-mi increase in travel distance leads to a 21% reduction 
in the odds of a child walking or biking to school. But the same                    
increase in travel distance results in a 79% reduction in the odds of                    
a child walking or biking to school at least 3 days a week. Similar                      
findings can be observed for street connectivity around a school site.                   
Car-use attitudes showed a negative association with the dependent                       
variables, as expected. Inclusion of the attitude variables in the model                 
does not appear to influence the effects of travel distance.                                
											
											
Moderation Effects                                                                       
											
A series of stratified regression analyses were run by using attitudes                   
as the moderating variables. The full sample was stratified into three                   
groups on the basis of values of ASC attitude and on the values                          
of car attitude, respectively. These models all predicted the odds                       

of a child walking or biking to school at least 1 day a week. (The
decision to use the lower-frequency ASC as the dependent variable 
resulted from the imbalance of value distribution for higherfrequency 
ASC when segmented by attitude levels.) Table 6 reports
output from models stratified by ASC attitudes and Table 7 from
models stratified by car-use attitudes.
Table 6 shows that, for the group with the weak ASC attitude, the
odds of ASC were unrelated to the environmental variables. The only
factor that had a statistically significant coefficient was extremely
household income. Compared with higher-income households, lowincome 
families with weak ASC attitudes were more likely to use
ASC. This finding suggests that, in some cases, ASC is used not as a
desired choice but more out of necessity: children from low-income
households may have to walk or bike to school because of inadequate
family resources.

For parents with moderate to strong ASC attitudes, the effects of
the major environmental characteristics on ASC appear discernible.
The effect of travel distance on ASC is stronger in the context of
a strong ASC attitude than in that of a moderate attitude. A 1-mi
increase in travel distance leads to a 20% reduction in the odds of a
child walking or biking to school when parents had moderate ASC
attitudes compared with 44% when parents had strong ASC attitudes. 
The street connectivity and neighborhood walkability measures 
registered statistically significant impacts on ASC only when
respondents had moderate or strong ASC attitudes.
Table 7 shows that variation in car-use attitudes had opposite moderating 
effects. The effects of the major environmental variables on
ASC were all statistically significant when parents’ car-use attitudes
were weak, but none of the environmental variables was statistically 
significant when car attitudes were strong. A similar pattern of
change applies to the ASC attitudes’ effects on the dependent ASC
behavior variable. Parents’ ASC attitudes did not have a statistically
significant influence on ASC behavior when parents’ car attitudes
were moderate or strong. Because ASC attitudes and car attitudes
are negatively correlated, parents who had a moderate or strong car
attitude tended to have a low ASC attitude. Together, these findings
suggest that weaker ASC attitudes are unlikely to exert influence on
ASC behavior beyond the effect of car-use a­ ttitudes in the pro-car
attitudinal context.
Figure 2 shows the predicted likelihood of ASC plotted against
travel distance, perceived neighborhood walkability, and schoolsite 
street connectivity separately and in different attitudinal contexts. 
Predicted likelihood is calculated for an 8-year-old child from
a typical family living in a typical environmental setting empirically
identified with the survey data. [A typical family considered here
had the following characteristics: family income between $60,000
and $99,999, two cars, no parents with a postgraduate degree, and a
child attending neighborhood school by residence. The typical environmental 
setting used in the calculation involved average walkable
travel distance (0.7 mi), average neighborhood walkability (3.56),
and average street connectivity (percentage of four-way intersections, 
17%).] The graphs confirm the findings discussed earlier: the
probability of using ASC is higher when ASC attitudes are stronger, 
with control for environmental and family characteristics. The
graphs also reveal that changes induced by ASC attitude in the ASC
probability are of greater magnitude when travel distance is shorter
and neighborhood walkability is better, as reflected by the larger
gaps between the lines when environmental conditions are more
supportive of ASC. These findings are in line with evidence from
psychological studies indicating that the attitude–behavior relationship 
is stronger when the environment is more favorable to
supporting the behavior in question (53). These graphs suggest
a symmetric nature to the interactional relationship between the
environment and attitudinal variables: the influences of these environmental 
conditions on the ASC probability is stronger when ASC
attitudes are stronger, as reflected by the steeper slopes of the lines
associated with stronger ASC attitudes.
Although the environment–behavior relationships show a clear
pattern of change when the ASC attitude varies, such a pattern is
less apparent as a function of car-use attitudes. This difference perhaps 
results from the fact that car-use attitudes do not have direct
correspondence with ASC behavior; their effects on ASC behavior
are indirect. For people with strong car-use attitudes, higher street
connectivity is associated with lower probability of ASC. Although
this relationship was not statistically significant, as indicated in
Table 7, the relationship is still worthy of attention. One explanation

could be that a better-connected street network supports pedestrian
travel but can also make automobile travel more convenient (54). In
a pro-car or car-dependent context, this environmental quality may
well encourage more car use at the expense of walking or biking.


Discussion of Results

This research offers insights into parents’ ASC decision-making processes. 
First, the analyses show that ASC attitudes exert impacts on
the probability of ASC behavior beyond the effects of environmental
and household characteristic factors. Furthermore, stronger attitude–
behavior relationships, as well as stronger environment–behavior
relationships, were observed when a higher threshold measure of
ASC (at least 3 days a week) was predicted than when a weaker
one was. This difference suggests that, as ASC frequency increases,
sensitivity to internal and external conditions also increases. These
findings also reveal the diminishing efficacy of ASC attitudes in
affecting behavior as car attitudes become stronger.
Second, the findings suggest that, when internal motivation is lacking 
(i.e., weak ASC attitude), favorable environmental conditions are
insufficient to bring about ASC. This conclusion suggests that parents
take advantage of or respond to favorable environmental conditions
only when they already have a sufficiently strong internal desire to
use ASC. The conclusion also implies that the environmental conditions 
that have been identified as important predictors of active school
commuting merely accommodate rather than shape parents’ preference 
for different travel means. When car-use attitudes are extremely
strong, environmental conditions showed an insignificant relationship 
with ASC behavior. It is possible that strong car dependence (in
a psychological sense) makes parents insensitive to environmental
cues regardless of their ASC attitudes.
Third, when parents hold stronger ASC attitudes and weaker car-use
attitudes, environmental variables have greater marginal impacts on
the probability of ASC behavior. This finding suggests that environmental 
improvements, such as shortened home–school distance and
better neighborhood walkability, may have a bigger impact on increasing 
ASC rates when they are instituted in a context of supportive
parental attitudes. These findings also suggest that the environment–
behavior correspondence observed in one place may not be replicated
in another because of differences in the psychological context.
Finally, this research confirms the importance of including attitudinal 
variables in the study of ASC and points to the importance of
examining not only the direct effect of environmental, household, and
psychological influences on ASC but also—and how critically—such
factors interact with one another. Many well-intentioned efforts at
increasing rates of ASC may have failed to reach their full potential
because of a failure to identify such effects.
Furthermore, the study highlights the need to explore how parents’
ASC attitudes develop over time. These findings suggest that parents’
beliefs in the environmental and health implications of ASC are correlated 
with their educational levels. But car-use attitudes, especially the
aspect related to car-dependence, had a weak connection with parents’
educational background. Together, these findings indicate that parents’ 
ASC attitude may be molded by making parents better informed
whereas car-use attitudes appear to be more situationally determined.
Interviews with parents suggested that many had never considered
walking or biking to school as an option because driving to school
was simply the default choice. As attitude is an important determinant
of ASC, future research is needed to improve understanding of the
factors that shape parents’ attitudes toward ASC.

Policy Implications

Existing literature on school travel has mainly adopted what may be
called the “barrier approach,” in which ASC is treated as a function
of external factors. Barriers such as long distance and lack of walkable 
environment have been the foci of studies that follow this perspective. 
Current intervention strategies also emphasize improving
the physical environment. Currently, SRTS programs allocate the
majority of their funding (70%) to physical improvement projects.
The authors argue that a psychological approach should be adopted
to understand the decision-making process of parents and to devise
more effective interventions.
By following this psychological approach, locations or communities 
with strong ASC attitudes and relatively weak car-use attitudes
should be targeted to receive environmental interventions. To make
such a suggestion tenable, assessment of ASC and car-use attitudes
should be included in the screening process for funding decisions.
Many SRTS programs conduct periodic surveys of school travel. But
so far these surveys have included few questions aimed at investigating
parental attitudes and other potentially significant socio­psychological
constructs (e.g., social norms about ASC). However, schools where
parental acceptance of and support for ASC is weak could benefit from
SRTS noninfrastructure activities that may shift parents’ ASC attitudes. 
A better understanding of parents’ attitudes, desires, perceived
behavioral control, perceptions of social norms, and behavioral intentions 
is necessary for ­predicting the ­effectiveness of SRTS and other
pro-ASC programs.
Finally, this research highlights the importance of disseminating 
information about the likely health and environmental consequences 
associated with different transportation modes, especially
those related to school trips. This action could be an effective
strategy for shifting parents’ attitudes. SRTS programs should take
advantage of the findings generated through academic research to
help build a strong case for ASC. This strategy also means that,
when research on school travel adopts an approach that integrates
perspectives from multiple disciplines, such as public health, social
psychology, and urban planning, the research outcomes can be of
stronger policy relevance.

