Urban greenery, active school transport, and body weight among Hong Kong                                                                                        
children

Children who are overweight or obese are at a higher risk of several diseases and are more likely to be overweight 
or obese in adulthood. Physical inactivity among children and adolescents is one of the major causes of
the prevalence of overweight and obesity problems, and hence promoting physical activity, especially active
school transport (AST), is a public health priority. Previous studies have provided evidence that urban greenery
may promote physical activity and improve body weight outcomes among children. However, the relationships
reported between these factors are inconsistent, partly due to the use of different measures of urban greenery.
the present study, we assessed different dimensions of urban greenery using three measures: number of parks;
the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) based on satellite imagery; and street greenness based on
Google Street View images. Multilevel regression analysis and structural equation modeling were conducted to
investigate the complex relationships among urban greenery, AST, and body weight for 1,148 primary school
students in Hong Kong. Overall, children attending schools with greener surrounding areas were more likely to
engage in AST and had lower body mass index (BMI). In addition, AST partially mediated the impact of urban
greenery on BMI. The findings demonstrate the importance of greenery around schools for children’s body
weight status. They also offer public health and planning guidance on how to address overweight and obesity
problems among children.

1. Introduction                                                                                    
												
The prevalence of childhood overweight and obesity has increased                             
over the last four decades, making this a worldwide public health                                  
problem (Hruby and Hu, 2015). Children with overweight and obesity                                 
problems are at a higher risk of developing many chronic health conditions 
and diseases that injure mental and physical health, including                             
asthma, sleep disorder, bone and joint problems, type II diabetes, and                             
heart disease (Kumar and Kelly, 2017; Ranjani et al., 2016). In the long                           
term, a child who is overweight or obese is more likely to be obese as an                          
adult, which is associated with a higher risk of developing heart disease, 
type II diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and many types of cancer as                            
well (Arroyo-Johnson and Mincey, 2016; Phillips, 2017). In Hong Kong,                                  
the rate of overweight and obesity among primary school students increased 
from 16.1% in 1996 to 20.0% in 2014, making childhood                                      
overweight and obesity a serious public health concern (Wang et al.,                               

2017; Wong et al., 2005).
Physical inactivity among children is one of the major causes of the
prevalence of childhood overweight and obesity (Goran et al., 1999).
The World Health Organization recommends that school-aged children
engage in 60 min of moderately intense to vigorous physical activity a
day. The results of experimental studies have indicated that modest
amounts of physical activity can provide health benefits and that vigorous 
activities may provide even greater benefits (Janssen and
LeBlanc, 2010). The recommended physical activity guidelines encourage 
various combinations of play, recreation, physical education
activities, sport, and active transport. However, in Hong Kong, less than
50% of young people meet these guidelines (CUHK, 2018).
The transportation modes between home and school typically include 
passive modes, such as busing or riding in a private vehicle, and
active modes, such as walking or cycling. Active school transport (AST)
is a major source of children and adolescent's physical activity (TudorLocke 
et al., 2001). A review focused on the relationship between AST
and physical activity and body weight has shown that children walking
or cycling to school had higher level of overall physical activity compared 
with those who travel to school in passive modes (Faulkner et al.,
2009). Empirical studies found the proportions of children meeting
physical activity guidelines significantly differed by school transportation 
modes. Measured by accelerometers, active school commuters exhibited 
higher overall physical activity levels per hour (Cooper et al.,
2003; Sirard et al., 2005), or more minutes of moderate-to-vigorous
physical activity per day, than passive commuters (Alexander et al.,
2005; Faulkner et al., 2009; Kek et al., 2019; Sirard et al., 2005). In
Ireland, Cyprus and Canada, children who walked to school significantly 
exhibited higher step counts during the before school period,
the after school period and the whole day compared to children who
used motorized transportation mode (Elaine and Marie, 2011;
Loucaides and Jago, 2008; Pabayo et al., 2012). Researchers also found
evidence that primary school boys who walked or cycled to school were
significantly more physically active than those traveling by car, while
girls who walked but not cycled to school were significantly associated
with higher daily physical activity levels (Cooper et al., 2005). AST is
also well placed to address inequalities in physical activity participation
in terms of age, gender, and socioeconomic status (Brainard et al.,
2019; Mandic et al., 2015; Stark et al., 2018). Thus, AST has the potential 
to make a substantial contribution to children’s daily overall
physical activity (Pate et al., 2016). However, AST has declined dramatically 
in various contexts, including Australia, the United States, the
United Kingdom, and Hong Kong. In the United States, nearly half
(49%) of children aged 5 to 14 actively traveled to school in 1969 but in
2009, the rate had dropped to 13% (McDonald et al., 2011). In Hong
Kong, the rate of AST also dropped from 40% to 29% over the last
several decades (Census & Statistics Department of Hong Kong, 2016).
Children’s levels of physical activity are highly volatile and may be
influenced by a multitude of factors, including physiological, psychological, 
sociocultural, and environmental determinants (Almanza et al.,
2012; Duncan et al., 2014; Goran et al., 1999; Lovasi et al., 2011). Their
level of physical activity is associated with numerous built environment
factors (Saelens et al., 2003), such as land use mix (Aytur et al., 2008;
Frank et al., 2004; Saelens et al., 2003), urban density (Saelens et al.,
2003; Schlossberg et al., 2006), and street connectivity (Larsen et al.,
2009; Saelens et al., 2003). However, evidence for the built environment 
determinants of AST remains mixed. In a recent study conducted
in New Zealand with 2,840 participants, AST was positively associated
with intersection density (1 km buffer) and negatively related to
dwelling density (1 km buffer) and distance to school (Ikeda et al.,
2018). Distance between home and school is regarded as one of the
most consistent correlates of AST, with long distance as one of the
greatest barriers (Chica-Olmo et al., 2018; Mandic et al., 2017;
Rothman et al., 2018). In the ultra-dense metropolis of Hong Kong,
most districts are highly self-contained and children usually attend

schools close to their housing estates, which may facilitate AST (Census
& Statistics Department of Hong Kong, 2011).
Among the relevant built environment factors, the relationship between 
urban greenery and physical activity has received increasing
research attention because rapid urbanization is reducing people’s opportunities 
to contact with nature (Gubbels et al., 2016; Hunter et al.,
2015; Lu, 2018a; Mårtensson et al., 2014). A study conducted in the
United States found that children living in areas with more street trees
were more physically active (Lovasi et al., 2011). In another study of
208 children, which used the normalized difference vegetation index
(NDVI) as an objective measure of urban greenery from satellite imagery, 
researchers found that greenness exposure was positively associated 
with the odds of engaging in moderate to vigorous physical activity 
(Almanza et al., 2012). Another study demonstrated that
children’s green space exposure was positively linked to their physical
activity (James et al., 2015). Specifically, researchers also found a
significantly positive association between the likelihood of conducting
AST and the presence of street trees and parks, good maintenance of
green spaces, and absence of litter (Larsen et al., 2009; Van Kann et al.,
2014).
Yet, findings regarding the association between urban greenery and
body weight status for children are mixed. A systematic review focusing
on urban greenness, physical activity, and body weight found fairly
strong evidence of a positive association between greenness and physical 
activity and a less consistent negative association between
greenness and body weight (James et al., 2015). One group of researchers 
found that greenness was significantly associated with a decreased 
risk of overweight among children in high-density areas, but
not in low-density counterparts (Liu et al., 2007). Another study found
that street tree density, but not park area, was associated with a lower
obesity prevalence level among children (Lovasi et al., 2013). Some
researchers have argued that these inconsistent results are due to the
use of different measures of urban greenery (de Vries et al., 2013; Fan
et al., 2011; Picavet et al., 2016). Recent studies have indicated that
perceived greenness plays a more significant role than overall objectively 
measured greenness in daily physical activity and body weight
status (Bai et al., 2013; de Jong et al., 2012; Hipp et al., 2016). To this
end, in this study, we used three methods to measure urban greenery
near children’s home and school: the number of parks, the NDVI, and
street greenness (extracted from Google Street View (GSV) images). The
measure of eye-level street greenery can effectively capture residents’
daily exposure to greenness and has been applied in recent public
health studies (Lu, 2018b).

1.1. Conceptual model and hypotheses

To address this research gap, we constructed a conceptual framework 
for modeling the effects of urban greenery on body weight status
(Fig. 1). As supported by strong evidence, the exposure to urban
Fig. 1. The concept framework among built environment, 
physical activity and health. For example, 
urban greenery can affect body weight
status via promoting physical activity, or other
pathways, such as promoting social contacts and
reducing air pollution and stress. Dark arrows
represent the strong evidence of direct impact
while the light arrow represents the weak evidence 
of potential direct and indirect impact.

greenery can increase physical activity, and increased physical activity            
can achieve better body weight outcomes. However, few researchers               
have used a single comprehensive framework to explore the mediating             
effects of physical activity on the relationship between urban greenery         
and body weight among children. Although it is intuitive to develop             
urban greenery interventions to increase children’s physical activity           
and hence improve their body weight outcomes, there is little rigorous          
scientific evidence to support such a policy. Based upon previous studies, 
we proposed that urban greenery may affect children's body                
weight outcomes via the mechanism of increasing physical activity               
(Mitchell, 2013; Richardson et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2018).                  
In the present study, we used structural equation modeling (SEM) to         
examine the degree to which AST mediates the relationship between               
urban greenery and body weight outcomes. As a powerful method of                
examining the complex relationships among a set of variables, SEM has           
been widely used in the health literature (Mohamadian et al., 2011;             
Weden, Carpiano, & Robert, 2008; Zhang et al., 2018). It can be used to
estimate abstract concepts (such as individual health outcomes) using           
measured variables, to examine the complex mediating relationships
among variables, and to improve the accuracy and credibility of model               
results by considering the influence of measurement error. Using SEM, a         
recent study found that daily greenspace exposure directly influenced           
adults’ health and indirectly affected health status through physical           
activity (Zhang et al., 2018), which may help researchers to understand         
the role of physical activity in mediating the relationship between             
urban greenery and health status among adults. Nevertheless, few                
studies have focused on the mediating mechanism of AST between                  
urban greenery and the weight status among children.                            
Fig. 2 shows the potential relationships among urban greenery, AST,         
and body weight status. We hypothesized that urban greenery has a               
significant effect on body weight status; and that it promotes daily                
physical activity and thus indirectly improves body weight status. Our          
five specific hypotheses are listed in Table 1.                                 							
													
2. Method

2.1. Participants                                                                   
									
We conducted a face-to-face survey in March 2018 with 1,148 Hong            
Kong primary school students, comprised of 559 girls and 589 boys               
from the fifth and sixth grades of 40 primary schools in Hong Kong, of              
which 11 were located in Kowloon, 13 in Hong Kong Island, and the               
other 16 in New Territories. The 40 primary schools were selected by            
stratified random sampling, aimed at selecting schools in neighborhoods 
with different socio-economic and built environment contexts.             
The list of participating schools is given in Appendix A. 
field of view and headings of north, east, south, and west.                      


A separate script was developed to determine the level of greenness              
in each GSV image using an automated machine-learning vegetation                     
extraction method (Houston, 2014). The ratio of greenery pixels to total             
pixels in four images from a GSV-generating point was used to assess                 
the level of street greenness for the point, as shown in the following               
equation:                                                                            
                                                              														
Street greenness values range between 0.0 and 1.0, with higher                   
values representing higher levels of street greenness. The average value             
for all GSV-generating points within the buffer zone of a dwelling or                
school location was used to assess the level of street greenness. The
automated vegetation extraction was validated using manual extraction. 
In our pilot study, 30 GSV images were randomly selected, and                  
their vegetation was manually extracted by a researcher using Adobe
Photoshop. The values of the GSV greenness extraction were highly                    
correlated with those of the manual extraction (r = 0.91; p < 0.01).
											
2.3. Other built environment variables                                               
											
We also calculated other built environment variables within the two              
buffer zones and adjusted the analysis models to incorporate them.                   
These variables were as follows: distance between school and dwelling                
location, population density, street intersection density, number of                 
shops, number of bus stops, number of schools, distance between                      
dwelling location and bus stops, and distance between dwelling location 
and Mass Transit Railway (MTR) stations. Population density was                      
calculated by the residential population per unit of land area in a pupil’s          
residential neighborhood. Street intersection density was measured by                
the number of street intersections involving three or more ways per unit             
of land area. The age and gender of the participants were also included              
in the analysis as potential confounding variables.                                  
Table 2

3. Data analysis

Demographics and AST characteristics of the sample (n = 1148).

3.1. Multilevel modeling   
                                                           
A two-step analysis strategy was implemented corresponding to the
data we collected from participants: 1) logistic regression to examine          
the association between urban greenness and the odds of engaging in                 
AST; 2) linear regression to examine the association between urban
greenness and BMI. Multilevel modeling was used for the analysis after           
controlling for other built environment and individual confounding               
variables. Individual participants were clustered within street blocks,
which are census defined and aggregated in Hong Kong as urban                          
planning units. Models 1 and 2 were used for the 400-m and 800-m
buffers, respectively. All of the analyses were performed using the            
statistical software STATA 13.0 (StataCorp LLC).                                

3.2. Structural equation modeling                   
                                   
Before conducting the SEM, the reliability and validity of the variables 
were verified using Cronbach’s alpha and factor analysis.                        
Cronbach’s alpha is a measure of internal consistency. It is considered

to be a measure of scale reliability (Bland and Altman, 1997; Raykov,
1997). The fit index CMIN/DF is the minimum discrepancy divided by
its degrees of freedom, and the ratio should be close to 1 for correct
models. The goodness of fit index (GFI) was devised by (Joreskog and
Sorbom, 1984) for maximum likelihood and unweighted least squares)
estimation. The adjusted GFI (AGFI) takes into account the degrees of
freedom available for testing the model. The population root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA) was also calculated (Joreskog
and Sorbom, 1984).
In the present study, we mainly focused on the direct impact of
urban greenery on individual BMI and the indirect impact of urban
greenery on individual BMI via AST. Personal characteristics and other
built environment variables were treated as confounders in the models.

4. Results

4.1. Results of Multilevel regression model

Table 2 and 3 shows the characteristics of the participants and built
environment respectively. Of the total 1,148 primary school students
from the fifth and sixth grades, 813 provided an accurate household
address. There were slightly more sixth graders than fifth graders
(53.4% vs. 46.6%). In terms of AST, 37.11% of the students walked or
rode a bicycle to school four or five days a week (426 of 1148), while
31.7% of the participants never walked or rode a bicycle to school. Boys
slightly outnumbered girls, but girls were more likely to walk or ride a
bicycle to schools than boys (51.3% vs. 48.7%).
The results of the regression model analysis for predicting the odds
of engaging AST are shown in Table 4. Street greenness and the number
of parks surrounding school were both positively associated with the
odds of engaging in AST with the 400 m buffer (OR [95% CI]: 1.32
[1.18, 1.51] and 1.21 [1.13, 1.32] respectively). The overall greenness
surrounding school was also positively associated with the odds of

engaging in AST with the 800 m buffer (OR [95% CI]: 1.09 [1.02,
1.17]).
Among other built environment factors, the street connectivity of
the school, which was defined as the density of street intersections
within the school’s surrounding area, was positively associated with the
odds of engaging in AST with both buffers (OR [95% CI]: 1.08 [1.01,
1.15] with the 400 m buffer and 1.03 [0.97, 1.12] with the 800 m
buffer). The number of bus stops in the neighborhood was negatively
associated with the odds of engaging in AST with the 400 m buffer.
Other built environment factors were not significantly associated with
engagement in AST.
The results of linear regression models for predicting BMI and built
environment factors are shown in Table 5. Street greenness and the
number of parks surrounding schools were significantly positively associated 
with BMI with the 400 m buffer (ß [95% CI]: 0.132 [0.019,
0.257] for street greenness and 0.118 [0.006, 0.204] for number of

parks). Other built environment factors were not significantly associated 
with BMI.

4.2. Results of structural equation modeling

The results of the fitting test suggest that the SEM established in the
present study (presented in Fig. 2) was an ideal research model, with
high agreement and stability through the matching degree analysis.
The model was constructed and analyzed using the statistical software 
package AMOS 21.0 (IBM, USA). It had a high degree of model
fitness, as indicated in Table 6 and Fig. 3.
The results of the SEM path analysis suggest that three hypotheses
(H3, H4, and H5) were verified (C.R. > 1.96, p < 0.05). Urban
greenery surrounding school had a significant effect on both AST and
BMI, confirming H3 and H4. AST also had a significant effect on body
weight, confirming H5. However, urban greenery surrounding residence 
has no significant effect on AST or body weight (p > 0.05),
refuting H1 and H2. The direct effect of urban greenery surrounding
school on body weight was 0.43, while the indirect effect with the
mediation of AST was 0.08 (Fig. 4 and Table 7). The total effect of
urban greenery surrounding school on body weight (direct effect + indirect effect) was 0.51.

5. Discussion

In this study, we examined the associations between urban built
environment factors, AST, and body weight for 1,148 primary school
students in Hong Kong. As suggested in the literature, uncertainty about
the effects of urban greenery on physical activity and health stems
partially from the use of different measures of urban greenery. Hence,
we assessed different dimensions of urban greenery using three measures: 
the number of parks, the NDVI (by satellite imagery), and street
greenness (by GSV images). Street greenness represents the eye-level
greenness perceived by school commuters on streets and therefore can
objectively estimate the daily greenery exposure of urban residents. We
further applied SEM to examine the mediation effects of AST between
urban greenery and weight status.

5.1. Major findings

We found significant associations between street greenness in the

school buffer area and both the pupils’ odds of engaging in AST and
their body weight status. The findings of our study concur with previous
findings regarding the relationship between urban greenery and children’s 
engagement in physical activity (Almanza et al., 2012; Bell et al.,
2008). Children attending a school with a greener surrounding environment 
are more likely to commute to school on foot or by bicycle

and have a lower BMI. Furthermore, we supplement previous studies by
providing strong and positive evidence of the association of urban
greenery and the BMI of children (Lovasi et al., 2013). Our results
emphasize the role of urban greenery surrounding a school on AST and
BMI, whereas other studies have typically emphasized the role of urban
greenery near residential neighborhoods. This difference may stem
from our sampling methods and research design. We carefully selected
participants from primary schools with different built environment
characteristics, while other studies have selected participants based on
their dwelling locations. Hence, we observed greater variation in urban
greenery surrounding a school than in other studies.
Understanding how AST mediates the effect of urban greenery on
health is of paramount importance to develop effective interventions to
improve children’s body weight outcomes. Previous studies have provided 
strong evidence of the direct effect of urban greenery on body
weight and BMI (Bell et al., 2008; Duncan et al., 2014). However, the
indirect effect of urban greenery on body weight and BMI via AST has
not been explored. We conducted SEM to understand the complex relationships 
among urban greenery, AST, and BMI. Our findings suggest
that urban greenery directly affects body weight and also indirectly
affects body weight via AST. The findings of this study echo others
(Almanza et al., 2012; Bell et al., 2008) in stressing the importance of
urban greenness for promoting AST and preventing childhood overweight 
and obesity. Our findings are analogous to those of a previous
study among adults, which reported that urban greenery directly influences 
physical health and also indirectly affects it through physical
activity (Zhang et al., 2018). Hence, the direct effect of urban greenery
on health and its indirect effect via physical activity can be regarded as
reasonably robust and may be applicable across age groups.
From a methodological perspective, street greenness measured by

GSV images, but not by the NDVI, was found to have a positive effect on
AST and BMI. As we mentioned in Section 1, inconsistent results of
studies on the association between urban greenness and body weight
status may be due to the different measures of urban greenery, and the
results of our study also support this argument. It is plausible that street
greenness and the NDVI capture different dimensions of urban
greenery, given that the former focuses on eye-level greenness and the
latter focuses on the overall greenery in an area. Street greenness may
better estimate daily greenery exposure because it better represents
what a resident perceives and streets are used more than other areas
(Lu, 2018b). The superior performance of street greenness over the
NDVI is also consistent with the previous finding that perceived
greenness has a stronger impact on people’s health and physical activity
than overall greenness, as measured by the NDVI (Leslie et al., 2010;
Sugiyama et al., 2008).
Previous studies have reported correlations between AST and body
weight and other built environment factors, such as urban density,
street connectivity, and distance between school and residence (Duncan
et al., 2014; Faulkner et al., 2009; Mitchell, 2013). In contrast, we
found only one such association (between AST and body weight and
street connectivity). This difference may be accounted for by differences 
in urban contexts (Lu et al., 2019). For example, Hong Kong has a
much higher urban density than the Western cities in which most
previous studies were conducted. Understanding the different contexts
of the social and built environments could aid in developing localized
public health and planning policy for children.

5.2. Policy implications

The findings of our study demonstrate the importance of urban
greenery, especially around schools, in promoting children’s AST behavior 
and improving their body weight status. These findings have
important implications for policymakers, health promoters, and urban
planners and designers. Government agencies should consider establishing 
targeted policy plans to promote children’s health by creating
new greenspaces or improving existing greenspaces around schools.
More specifically, future planning and design of urban greenspaces
should shift from an exclusive focus on the size or the number of
greenspaces to the practice considering the accessibility and visibility of
those greenspaces, so they can be easily perceived by children in their
daily lives. This is particularly critical for high-density cities, such as
Hong Kong, where land supply is limited and greenspaces in built-up
areas are scarce.

5.3. Strengths and limitations

One strength of this study is that we assessed urban greenery using
three methods. The simultaneous use of three urban greenery methods
may help us to distinguish which aspects of urban greenery are of
particular importance for children’s AST behaviors and body weight
status. The other strength is the use of SEM to explore the direct effect

of urban greenery on body weight status and the indirect effect via AST.
This advanced statistical technique helped us to understand the relationships 
between urban greenery, AST, and body weight. However,
we could not infer any causal relationships because of the cross-sectional 
research design. Future studies could use natural experiments to
deliver more robust scientific evidence. We also used questionnaires to
assess AST, which may be subject to recall bias or social desirability
bias. In future studies, school travel behaviors could be collected by
portable GPS and/or accelerometer equipment for more objective
measures (Li et al., 2019).

6. Conclusion

Using three urban greenery measures (number of parks, NDVI, and
street greenery with GSV images), we found that street greenery in the
area surrounding a school was significantly associated with children’s
AST behaviors and body weight status. AST was also found to play a
mediating role in the relationship between urban greenery and the body
weight status of children. The findings of this study join others in
highlighting the importance of greenery exposure around schools in
promoting AST and improving body weight status among children.
Future planning and design practice should consider the visibility of
greenspaces as well as more traditional planning parameters such as the
size or number of greenspaces.