Statewide Analysis of Individuals’ Exposure to Business Establishments and Active Travel Behaviour                   

This study analyzes the association between exposure to various economic establishments, such as retail stores and schools,
and walking and cycling at the individual level. Instead of using a land use mix indicator applied in many previous studies, 17
types of establishments were investigated, based on the North American Industrial Classification System, located within individuals’ 
activity spaces. The 2017 Wisconsin Add-On to the National Household Travel Survey was used to compute the density 
of establishments for two different activity space measurements: (1) time-weighted one standard deviational ellipses, and
(2) convex hulls. Among the significant results agreed on by both activity space measurements, walking and cycling are positively 
associated with exposure to educational services and public administration establishments, and negatively associated
with exposure to finance and insurance establishments. The results indicate a possible strategy: active travel promotion could
leverage the potential for schools and local government offices to serve as anchor institutions for health-promoting travel
behavior. In addition to strategies for the built environment, the research also suggests that physical activity encouragement
could target individuals, such as workers, who probably have exposure to establishments with a negative association with
active travel, such as in the finance and insurance sector.

National public health policies throughout the world               
emphasize the importance of adequate physical activity,            
which decreases the risks of mortality, being overweight,              
obesity, and chronic diseases (1–3). People can meet               
these national guidelines by walking, cycling, and riding          
transit for everyday needs, not only through leisure and           
exercise (4, 5). In addition, experts in health behavior           
have found that people with lower levels of fitness can            
more easily participate in walking and cycling, which              
makes these modes especially important for health promotion. 
Compared to vigorous exercise, adopting moderate 
physical activity is easier to achieve and maintain,         
and it generates the greatest relative health improvement              
for sedentary people (6–8). Therefore, promoting physically 
active travel, especially walking and cycling, has           
become a key public health strategy.                               
One policy approach has focused on removing environmental 
barriers to physical activity by investing in            
built environments that encourage people to incorporate
active travel into their daily routine (9). Plenty of interventions 
from transportation, planning, and urban                   
Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI
design are relevant to this approach, such as complete
streets policies, safe routes to school polices, and methods      
for metropolitan planning organizations and other                  

agencies to prioritize health in their transportation
improvement programs.
This study contributes to understanding policies that
support active travel through built environments, with a
specific focus on business environments such as retail,
educational, recreational, and industrial places. Previous
research has shown that an area’s land use mix, presence
of retail, and the density of activities—in combination
with infrastructure and transportation system design—
influence walking and cycling (10–12). For instance, auto
repair shops and auto dealerships deter walking, and
parks generate walk trips (13, 14).
Although these built environment conditions describe
urban or metropolitan walkability, they may not be key
factors for rural or exurban locations or populations
(15). Therefore, in this study the scale of analysis is changed 
to include urban and rural places and examine how
exposure to the business establishments influences

walking and cycling for a representative sample for the
state of Wisconsin in the United States. Moreover,
the analysis aligns individual-level exposures and
individual-level outcomes instead of relying on aggregated 
measurements. The results can be useful to communities 
developing land use, transportation, and health
policies to increase active transportation.

Literature and Background

Representing Specific Establishments in the Built
Environment
The broader question guiding this research asks which
features of built environments influence active travel
behavior. Cervero and Kockelman distilled these features
into indicators representing an area’s activity density,
land use diversity, and design (3Ds) (16). Recent studies
have generally confirmed that places with higher residential 
and employment density, smaller block size, connected 
street patterns, pedestrian and bicycle
infrastructure and amenities, and a higher degree of land
use mix are associated with less driving and more walking 
and cycling (17–21). However, Frank and Engelke
pointed out that built environment variables usually covary 
or correlate across space (6). It is difficult to determine 
precisely which features matter most.
Many studies find that land use mix is an important
determinant of walkability, and entropy-based indices
have been the most popular indicator of land use mix (22–
25). These studies usually categorize land use as residential,
commercial, recreational, office, and educational. Cao
et al., using information from an online yellow pages,
accounted for the location of institutional, maintenance,
dining, and leisure destinations (26). Nonetheless, commercial 
establishments were aggregated into one accessibility
variable for a causal model. By simply looking at the
degree of mix or accessibility to amenities, it is still unclear
which specific types of neighborhood amenities, specifically 
economic establishments, are most critical to active
travel behavior, particularly across urban, suburban, and
rural places with different land use patterns.
The relevance of specific establishments is an important 
concern in research about the association between
built environment and public health. Kestens et al.
accounted for exposure to different types of food stores
in research about the risk of being overweight (27). They
found that the risk of being overweight increases with
exposure to fast food restaurants. However, there is
more to understand about the interrelationships between
specific land use types and active travel behavior.

Representing Exposure to Built Environments
Most studies of active travel and built environments rely
on two types of aggregated data: 1) representing places

by their neighborhood boundaries, census tracts, block
groups, ZIP codes, or traffic analysis zones; and 2) representing 
populations by their aggregate travel outcomes
(17, 21, 28, 29). In this analysis, the concept of the activity 
space is used as the unit of analysis, which allows us
to link individual-level travel outcomes with individuallevel 
exposures, thereby making a closer connection
between the exposure and the outcome.
Activity spaces are the geographical areas that people
visit during the course of their daily activities (30, 31).
Activity spaces have been used to represent exposure,
usually as an alternative to residential neighborhood.
With respect to transportation systems, activity spaces
include areas near the home and place of work, as well
as journeys to school, church, medical appointments,
shopping, social occasions, and other activities through
which people have direct contact with their environments. 
Activity spaces have both spatial and temporal
components. Several socioeconomic and demographic
factors influence the size and nature of individuals’ activity 
spaces, such as age, gender, labor force participation,
access to a private automobile, household size, household 
income, and education (32, 33).
Activity spaces help overcome prior methodological
limitations of similar analyses. For example, Howell
et al. (34) used a survey of Canadian college students to
show that the built environment and transportationrelated 
physical activity relationship cannot be adequately 
assessed by using only individuals’ residential
environments, as people may spend much of their time
outside home-based activity spaces. Instead of analyzing
the home-based activity spaces, Gunn et al. examined
metrics for built environment features surrounding local
shopping centers anchored by supermarkets, and derived
policy implications for supermarket provision (20).
However, no previous studies have examined how built
environment features within personal activity space
influence active travel among populations in general.

Data and Methods
Travel Data

This study uses the Wisconsin Add-On to the 2017
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) to construct
activity spaces for individuals, represent individual and
household characteristics, and indicate levels of physical
activity (35). In the travel survey, Wisconsin households
were selected from 16 substrata representing the entire
state. The daily travel data include an inventory of all
trips taken within a 24-h period by all household members 
aged 5 or older. This data set includes 84,544 trips
for 19,941 persons in 10,723 households. The confidential 
data also include geocoded location information for
57,040 homes, workplaces, schools, and other travel

destinations. The activity space construction for this
study was based on these geocoded locations.

Activity Spaces Measures

Several different activity space measurements have been
applied to study health and travel behavior, including
perceived or officially defined neighborhoods, convex
hulls (CHs), route buffers, kernel density surfaces, and
standard deviational ellipses (SDEs). The measures have
unique advantages and drawbacks with respect to data
availability and measurement accuracy. They have been
constructed using travel diaries, global positioning system 
tracking, social media data mining, or web-based
questionnaires (36–41).
Two measures were used to represent activity spaces:
time-weighted one SDEs and CHs. These two representations 
accommodate the NHTS data, which provide a
finite set of point locations but no line features to represent 
route choice. Because of this data limitation, as well
as the large scope of the study area, questions that
required detailed route trajectories were not pursued.
The time-weighted SDE and CH measures generally
result in an activity space larger than observed routebased 
activity spaces (42). Nevertheless, these larger
Figure 1. Illustration of activity space measurements for an
areas capture places that an individual might not have
interacted with but would potentially encounter when
carrying out everyday activities.
The duration of activity space data collection also
affects the measurement’s reliability. Studies of this issue
show that at least 14 days of travel activity observation
are desirable for identifying activity space accurately (39,
43). However, obtaining 14 days of GPS data is not
always feasible. Using only 1 day of travel activity for
each person is also considered valid when the travel survey 
data set is sufficiently large, such as for the
Wisconsin Add-On to the NHTS (27).
Based on the geocoded locations in the travel survey,
10,362 valid SDEs and 19,941 CHs for individuals who
traveled on the day of the travel survey were constructed.
For SDEs, a one SDE was generated for each individual
and weighted based on the individual’s duration at each
location, which is information available from the travel
diary (see Figure 1). Because creating an ellipse requires
at least three distinct point features with variation in both
the X and Y axes, 9,579 out of 19,941 cases had too few
features or too few vertices to create a valid geometry
and were excluded from this step. Among these 9,579
excluded cases, 7,819 contained only two points, which
indicates that the person had only been at two places on
individual’s travel survey day.

the travel day. The other 1,760 cases contained missing
values for duration, which were time-weighted as zeros,
resulting in missing vertices.
A CH is the minimum convex polygon enclosing the
set of destinations of an individual on a Euclidean space.
All 19,941 people generated a valid CH based on the
ArcGIS minimum bounding geometry tool. If only two
points were available, a line feature was generated.
The data set was further refined by selecting cases in
which the activity space was located completely within
Wisconsin, which resulted in 7,539 SDEs and 15,640
CHs.

Business Types and Economic Exposure

In this study, ‘‘economic exposure’’ is defined as an individual’s 
exposure to different types of businesses in the
built environment. The North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) codes were used, available 
from the 2015 Environmental Systems Research
Institute (Esri) Business Analyst, to identify and classify
geocoded business locations (44).
NAICS is an industry classification system that groups
establishments into industries based on the similarity of
their production processes. The system includes 20 sectors 
represented by two-digit NAICS codes covering all
economic activities (45). For 2015, there were 252,253
economic activities located within the state of Wisconsin;
91.7% of these were located within the sampled personal
activity spaces measured by time-weighted SDEs, and
91.5% were located within the sampled personal activity
space measured by CHs.
For this analysis, the top 17 categories that are most
frequent and relevant to individuals’ daily activities were
selected and the remaining three that were not informative 
for the research objective were excluded. The number 
of establishments for the three excluded categories
account for only 0.4% of the total establishments in both
activity space measurements.

For each traveler in the Wisconsin Add-On to the
2017 NHTS, the density of economic exposure was computed 
as the count of economic locations within the individual’s 
activity space divided by the size of the
individual’s activity space in square miles. In general, the
density of economic exposure in activity spaces measured
by CHs has a larger variance than that measured by
time-weighted SDEs.


Active Travel Behavior and Person Characteristics
All travel behavior and sociodemographic variables were
derived from the NHTS data set. The outcome
variable—active travel behavior—is defined as the
self-reported number of walking plus cycling trips for all

purposes in the past 7 days for an individual, ranging
from 0 to 149 with a mean of 6.0 and standard deviation
of 8.7. These walk or bike trips include all purposes of
walking or bicycling outside, including walking or bicycling 
to exercise, to a friend’s house, around the neighborhood, 
to the store, and walking the dog; 44% of the
unweighted self-reported walk or bike trips were strictly
to exercise, according to the raw data.
Self-selection has been a key consideration in previous
research (26, 34, 46). For example, a physically active
person may choose to be exposed to certain economic
establishments and a walkable built environment to satisfy 
their preferences for physical activity. Therefore, an
individual’s personal characteristics are assumed to affect
both their exposure to economic locations and the active
travel behavior. To control for the self-selection effect,
age, sex, self-reported baseline level of physical activity,
and household income were included as confounders.
In addition, two urban form characteristics were controlled 
for, beyond the business counts: intersection density 
and proximity to transit stops, measured at the
activity space level for each individual. These two variables 
may affect both the location of different establishments 
and individuals’ active travel behavior. Spatial data
were extracted from the National Walkability Index (47).
Among the 7,539 SDE observations, eight had missing
physical activity level data, 16 had missing self-reported
walking in the past week, one had missing self-reported
cycling in the past week, and 189 had missing household
income information. Excluding these 214 missing values
resulted in 7,325 observations for the SDE measurement.
To make the two activity space measurements more comparable, 
the cases of CHs to SDEs were further matched,
which resulted in 6,286 observations for both measurements. 
Therefore, the final data analysis was based on
these 6,286 individuals. The average activity space size
was 28.1 mi2 measured by SDEs, and 36.6 mi2 measured
by CHs. Table 1 presents the definitions of all variables
and descriptive statistics.

Model Specification

Table 1 shows that the outcome variable—the count of
the self-reported walking and cycling trips in the past
week—has a larger variance than mean, which indicates
an overdispersion of the outcome variable. An overdispersion 
value of 11.06 for SDEs and 11.02 for CHs from
an overdispersion test indicates that a negative binomial
regression is preferred (48). The model specification is
the following:
For each individual i,

where                                                                           
the parameter mi = the expected number of walk plus                             
bike trips within a week,                                                       
b = a vector of estimable regression coefficients,                              
Xi = a matrix of values of independent variables, and                                                              
expðei Þ = the error term which follows a gamma distribution 
with mean 1 and variance a.                                                               
In a negative binomial model, a is referred to as the overdisrsion 
parameter, which allows the variance to differ from
the mean. The negative binomial distribution has the form
											
where yi is the count of walk plus bike trips within a
week for each individual, and GðÞ is a gamma function.
The Maximum Likelihood Estimation function of the
model, L(), is

Results

Table 2 presents the negative binomial model estimation
results. Variable inflation factor (VIF) was applied to

assess multicollinearity. VIFs are less than 2.4 and 2.7
for all predictors in SDE and CH measurements, respectively. 
This suggests low multicollinearity for both activity 
space measurements. If 0 does not fall in the 95%
confidence interval for an estimate, this estimate is statistically 
significant at the 95% confidence level.
Both SDE and CH activity space measurements agree
that exposure to educational services and public administration 
have a statistically significant positive association
with the active travel behavior of walking and bicycling.
Both measurements report a statistically significant negative association with exposure to finance and insurance.
The CH measurement agrees with the SDE measurement
for 13 out of 17 exposure variables with reference to the
direction of effects. The other four sectors that failed to
reach agreement are retail trade, other personal services,
accommodation and food services, and wholesale trade.
For the SDE measurement alone, exposure to transportation 
and warehousing, as well as to information
services, has significant negative effects on active travel
behavior at the 95% confidence level. The additional
exposures that had positive effects on active travel at the
95% confidence level for the CH measurement alone
include professional, scientific, and technical services,
and real estate. Exposure to waste management establishments 
in the CH had a significantly negative effect on
active travel at the 95% confidence level.
Interpreting the negative binomial regression model
results is not intuitive because the regression coefficients
are the log count values of exposure. By exponentiating
regression coefficients the incidence rate ratio is
obtained—the change factor in active travel behavior in
response to a one count per square mile change of exposure 
variable values. For example, the expected walking
or bicycling trips within a week changes by a factor of
expð0:0116Þ = 1:0117, which is a 1.17% increase, in
response to an additional educational service establishment 
per square mile in an individual’s activity space for
the SDE measurement, holding other factors constant.
The active travel behavior of walking plus bicycling has
a mean of six times a week. On average, to increase the
amount of active travel from six to seven times a week
for an individual, exposure needs to be increased by
lnð7=6Þ=lnð1:0117Þ = 13:25 more educational services
per square mile in the individual’s activity space.
To interpret the effect of finance and insurance for the
CH measurement, the expected walking or bicycling trips
in a week change by a factor of expð0:0054Þ = 0:9946,
which is a decrease of 0.54%, in response to an additional 
finance and insurance establishment per square
mile in an individual’s activity space, holding other factors 
constant. On average, increasing walking or bicycling 
trips in a week from six to seven times would
require the expected density of finance and insurance

establishment change by lnð7=6Þ=lnð0:9946Þ =  28:50.
Figure 2 visualizes the effects of all statistically significant 
exposures on active travel measured by both SDEs
and CHs.

Person and Urban Form Characteristics

Both SDE and CH activity space measurements report
statistically significant results for several sociodemographic 
and physical activity level variables. When other
factors are held constant, females walk or bike less than
males, on average. Moreover, reporting a higher baseline
level physical activity is significantly related to more
active travel behavior.
Proximity to transit does not significantly associate
with active travel. Intersection density within individuals’
activity spaces is significantly negatively related to active
travel for the SDE measurement. These results are counterintuitive 
because places with higher intersection density 
and more transit stops are considered more
walkable, at least for urban environments. However, this
is to some extent consistent with Joens-Matre et al. who
have found that urban children are the least active overall 
(49). In addition, Fan et al. have suggested that physical 
activity did not vary unidirectionally with degree of
urbanization (50). These findings also suggest that measuring 
travel physical activity at the individual level can
yield different results from measuring it at the neighborhood 
level (34).
Higher income is associated with less active travel
behavior. This may be because people with higher
incomes tend to participate in more structured leisure
time physical activities such as in the gym or parks,
whereas people with lower income may tend to walk,
bike, or use public transit in their daily travel.

Educational Services, Finance and Insurance, and
Public Administration
A closer look was taken of the spatial patterns of the
three types of economic establishments with significant
effects agreed on by both activity space measurements:
educational services, public administration, and finance
and insurance. Figure 3 presents the densities of these
three sectors on a 5- 3 5-mi grid for Wisconsin. It was
observed that the establishments cluster in urban areas,
mainly Milwaukee, Madison, Wausau, Appleton, Green
Bay, and Eau Claire. Table 3 presents information about
subgroups within the three sectors, categorized by their
four-digit NAICS code. Elementary and secondary
schools account for most educational services establishments 
(60.1%). Public administration establishments are
mainly executive, legislative, and other general government 
support activities, which account for 58.2% of

sites. Most finance and insurance establishments are
depository credit intermediation establishments, that is,
branch banks.

Discussion

The statistical analysis indicates that active travel behavior 
for individuals is associated with a higher exposure
to educational services and public administration and a

lower exposure to finance and insurance establishments.
These establishment types may be closely related to
walkability. Most educational services in the analysis are
elementary and secondary schools. The walkability of
areas around them could be high if schools are located
within residential neighborhoods, and they may have
been enhanced by programs such as the Safe Routes to
School, which encourages children from kindergarten to
eighth grade to walk and bike to school. The presence of


safe and comfortable walking and bicycling routes                             
around schools could benefit schoolchildren, as well as                       
their communities more broadly. In Wisconsin, higher                          
education may also play a role. University and college                        

campuses can be large employment centers, and residential
campuses, they are the locationn of student housing.
These physical and social environment may
generate a higher frequency of walking and cycling

Explanations for the other two significant factors
agreed on by both activity space measurements are less
intuitive than educational services. Establishments in the
public administration sector are mainly local government
offices, which can be clustered in central urban areas
with relatively more walkable environments. Finance
and insurance establishments mainly include branches of
banks and credit unions. As a result of the deregulation
and geographic liberalization of banking services since
the 1980s, locations of financial services are based on
demography, local trade areas, and market conditions
(51, 52). Access to banking services may be more automobile 
dependent in the suburbs, small towns, and rural
areas because of low population density.
Several other exposures were identified as significant
by either the SDE or the CH measurement but not both.
These other exposures that potentially positively influence 
active travel include professional, scientific, and
technical services (CHs) and real estate (CHs). Other
exposures that are potentially negatively associated with
active travel include transportation and warehousing
(SDEs), information (SDEs), and waste management
(CHs). This can be explained by their relevance to people’s 
everyday activities. For instance, transportation
and warehousing and waste management establishments
are highly specialized, often located in peripheral areas
with access to freeways, and are mainly accessed by
workers. This also implies that workers at these locations
have inferior conditions for walking or cycling to their
workplaces. Therefore, public health professionals may
consider giving higher priority to developing physical
activity opportunities around these workplaces.
The effects of the remaining exposures are unclear.
Noticeably, retail trade establishments are the most prevalent 
establishment type in the study and they are
closely related to the activities of daily life. However,
both activity space measurements found a very small and
insignificant association between retail trade exposure
and active travel. This may be because many retail trade
establishments are located within big-box stores or strip
malls, not walkable main streets. Some previous research
has assumed that retail stores are positively related to
walkability, or have even used the proximity to retail
stores as an indicator of walkability (25, 53–55).
Although this might be true at the neighborhood level,
particularly in dense urban areas, this current study does
not support this assumption at the population level.
Planners and policy makers need to instead consider
improving walkability around retail establishments that
are not always pedestrian or bicycle friendly.
It is not realistic to build more schools or government
offices solely for the purpose of promoting more walking
or bicycling trips. Nevertheless, schools, government
buildings, and other ‘‘anchor institutions’’ can influence
larger populations, not just their users. The built environments 
around these anchor institutions could be prioritized 
when making decisions about investment in
pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure, green infrastructure, 
and transit station area design, for example.

Limitations

Although no previous studies have examined the economic 
exposure and active travel using the activity space
as the unit of analysis, several limitations of this study
should be noted. First, this study did not identify certain
colocation effects among establishments to reflect the
effect of land use mix. Land use mix, however, has a
complicated relationship with travel behavior. In a
metaregression analysis, Stevens found that people actually 
drive more when land use mix increases (11). We
have tested this effect by introducing interaction terms
among economic categories and the result was not significant 
in general. Because of the scope of this study, the
result was not presented. Second, active travel behavior
was measured by the frequency of walking and cycling,
rather than total minutes of walking and cycling, which
could capture the intensity of active travel more precisely. 
Third, the categorization of economic establishment 
was based on the two-digit NAICS code. This is a
fairly rough classification. More detailed examinations
of economic establishments within specific industrial
types could be more revealing. Fourth, the density of
economic exposure variables used in this study only indicates 
the proximity of these exposures for individuals,
rather than their actual accessibility. The accessibility of
these economic establishments may be determined by
microscale built environment features such as pedestrian
paths, bike lanes, street furniture, and other elements
and their combination. How these microscale built environment 
features mediate the accessibility to economic
establishments could be an area for future research.

Conclusion

This study uses the activity space as the spatial unit of
analysis to examine the types of economic establishments
that individuals would potentially encounter in their
daily activities beyond their residential neighborhoods.
Exposures to economic establishments were systematically 
quantified and they represent a wider range of land
use types beyond residential, commercial, recreational,
office, and educational, which have been analyzed in previous 
studies (23–25). The analysis identified schools and
public buildings as anchor institutions that merit urban
design attention because of their positive relationship to
active transportation at the population level.
Communities may take advantage of educational services

to develop more pedestrian-oriented infrastructures or
introduce more health-promoting programs to the surrounding 
communities.
This study has challenged the conventional assumption 
found in previous research that retail stores are a
positive feature in promoting active travel. This assumption 
may hold when focusing on a neighborhood, corridor, 
or zone within a metropolitan area. However, in
this study of an entire state, we did not find evidence of
a relationship between retail stores and active travel.
Consequently, we see designing walkable retail environments 
as an ongoing concern for research and community development.
Public health professionals have the expertise to provide 
health promotion recommendations that target
individual-level behavior change, such as suggesting individual 
physical activity plans. One implication of this
research for health experts is that their work may want to
focus on people who are known to have exposure to less
walkable economic establishments, such as finance and
insurance, transportation and warehousing, information
services, and waste management services. Specifically,
more physical activity opportunities may need to be provided 
to employees of these workplaces.