Planning for Safe Schools: Impacts
of School Siting and Surrounding                                                                             
Environments on Traffic Safety                                                                                      

abstract
This study explores the impacts of school siting and surrounding built environments on rates of motorist and pedestrian
crashes around public schools in the Austin Independent School District, Texas, by using log-linear regressions. The results
show that a higher sidewalk coverage and a higher percentage of local roads reduce pedestrian crashes around schools,
while higher percentages of highways and commercial uses and higher transit stop densities increase motorist and pedestrian
crashes. It is desirable to locate schools in areas with higher percentages of local roads and lower percentages of highways
and commercial uses.

Introduction                                                                  
Schools are important community facilities dedicated to children’s 
education, and may also accommodate community                          
residents’ social and recreational activities. Studies have                   
shown that schools increase the risk for traffic crashes in                   
their vicinity because they generate regular, concentrated,                   
and congested traffic flows (Abdel-Aty, Chundi, and Lee                       
2007; Clifton, Burnier, and Akar 2009; Clifton and Kreamer-Fults 
2007; LaScala, Gruenewald, and Johnson 2004).                           
School locations and development patterns of the surrounding 
neighborhoods also affect traffic safety. Traditional                     
“neighborhood schools” are often located in the center of the                 
neighborhood, featuring short home-to-school distances,                       
walkable environments, and low-speed traffic that help                        
ensure pedestrian safety (Ewing and Greene 2003). However,                    
recent decades have witnessed a trend toward “sprawl,” with                   
schools being further away from the neighborhood center                            
and often next to high-speed arterials or highways and auto oriented 
environments lacking pedestrian infrastructure                       
(NGA Center for Best Practices 2007).                                         
Little attention has been devoted to the impacts of
school locations and surroundings on traffic safety around                    
schools. This study addresses this knowledge gap by                           
reviewing relevant trends and literature, and then conduct-University 
of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
ing an empirical study to identify environmental factors                      
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
related to crash rates around public schools in Austin,
Corresponding Author:
Texas. The results provide insights about how to optimize                     
traffic safety around schools through school siting and                       
neighborhood planning.                                                        

School Siting and Its Implications on Traffic

In 1929, Perry proposed the influential concept of “neighborhood unit” 
as a planning model for creating functional, self contained 
neighborhoods in metropolitan areas. A key
principle of this model is to center the school in the neighborhood 
so that students can live within a half-mile, walkable
distance from school. He also proposed to locate commercial
areas and high-speed roadways (i.e., highways and arterials)
on the periphery and to use curvilinear local streets inside the
neighborhood to minimize through traffic and ensure low
traffic speed and pedestrian safety. In such a neighborhood,
traffic around schools is mostly limited to school travel and
other within-neighborhood trips, supported by pedestrian
infrastructure and away from high-speed traffic, and as a
result, is relatively safe.
In reality, for much of the twentieth century, schools were
mostly located in or near neighborhood centers and provided
relatively good pedestrian access (NGA Center for Best
Practices 2007). However, in recent decades, with growing

student populations and increasing urban sprawl, larger schools
away from neighborhood centers became increasingly popular
(NGA Center for Best Practices 2007). This “sprawl” trend is
partly driven by policies such as school funding formula that
favor the construction of new and larger schools in peripheral
areas over the renovation of existing schools in neighborhood
centers (NGA Center for Best Practices 2007). As a result,
these “sprawl” schools are often located near highways and/or
arterial roads and designed for the convenience of automobiles,
while ignoring the need of pedestrians and bicyclists.
Neighborhood environments around schools influence traffic 
volumes in the area and people’s choices between motorized
and nonmotorized transportation modes for travel to schools or
other destinations. In terms of traffic volumes, it is reasonable
expect that traffic-generating land uses such as commercial
areas will increase the volume of traffic in the area. As to mode
choices for children’s school travel, shorter distances consistently 
predict increases in active commute (walking and biking)
and reductions of driving; other factors such as nonmotorized
transportation infrastructure (sidewalks, bike lanes, crosswalks,
etc.), street connectivity, and high density have shown similar
positive impacts in some studies (Figure 1) (Stewart 2011). For
general travel behavior among adults, research has shown that
higher density, shorter distance to nonresidential destinations,
and land use mix encourage walking for transportation (Ewing
and Cervero 2001; Saelens and Handy 2008).

SRTS Program and Traffic Safety
around Schools

In 2005, the U.S. Congress allocated $612 million in funding
for the federal Safe Routes to School (SRTS) program to

promote safe and active commute (walking and biking) to
school through both infrastructure and noninfrastructure
projects. Empirical studies on safety impacts of these projects 
are still limited yet promising. A New York City study
examined the school-aged pedestrian injuries during school
travel hours. Results showed that the rates decreased by 44%
in census tracts with SRTS programs and remained
unchanged for those census tracts without SRTS projects
(DiMaggio and Li 2013). Another study reported that the
total number of pedestrian- or bicycle-involved collisions
significantly decreased within 250 feet of SRTS projects at
47 schools in California (Ragland et al. 2014). Moreover, the
sidewalk gap closure project decreased the number of students 
walking/biking on streets and shoulders, which reduced
traffic conflicts and crash risk (Boarnet et al. 2005).
Despite these initial positive results, the SRTS program
cannot address more fundamental issues related to traffic
safety around “sprawl” schools, such as the long distances
that necessitate the dependence on motorized transportation
and increased traffic volumes and the exposure to high-speed
traffic due to adjacency to highways and arterials that lack
pedestrian infrastructure. It is likely that more dramatic
changes in school siting and surrounding environments are
needed in order to encourage further improvements in traffic
safety around schools.

Environmental Correlates of Traffic
Safety

Environmental correlates of traffic safety have been studied by
many researchers but the results are still inconclusive. Higher
traffic volume and speed increase the risk of traffic exposure

and crashes (Clifton and Kreamer-Fults 2007; de Guevara,
Washington, and Oh 2004; Ewing and Dumbaugh 2009;
Graham and Glaister 2003; Wier et al. 2009), and built environments 
influence traffic volumes. Studies have shown that
development patterns with higher density, more employment
or commercial areas, and more arterial lane miles are associated 
with increased traffic volumes per area and, in turn, more
traffic crashes per area (Clifton and Kreamer-Fults 2007;
Delmelle, Thill, and Ha 2012; Dumbaugh and Rae 2009;
Hadayeghi, Shalaby, and Persaud 2010; Loukaitou-Sideris,
Liggett, and Sung 2007). However, the relative risk on a per
capita basis may be different. A literature review study actually
concluded that traffic environments of dense urban areas are
safer than the lower-volume environment of the suburbs on a
per capita basis, because fewer miles are driven per capita and
the traffic speed is generally lower in dense urban areas (Ewing
and Dumbaugh 2009). Presence of transit stops is another
safety-related factor. They are often focal points for pedestrian
activities and may, therefore, generate traffic conflicts between
pedestrians and vehicles (Ukkusuri et al. 2012). But it is possible 
that increased transit service may reduce vehicle miles traveled 
per capita. Street patterns also influence traffic safety, but
the results are not consistent either. Relevant studies have
shown both positive (de Guevara, Washington, and Oh 2004;
Graham and Glaister 2003) and negative relationships (Clifton,
Burnier, and Akar 2009) between street connectivity and traffic
crashes. Four-or-more-leg intersections generally produce
more conflicting traffic movements and crashes than three-leg
intersections (Dumbaugh and Rae 2009).

Factors Influencing Traffic Safety
around Schools

Despite previous studies on general traffic safety–built environment 
relationships, the corresponding risk factors for
crashes around schools have been understudied. Clifton and
Kreamer-Fults (2007) explored pedestrian–vehicle crashes
for all traffic in 0.25-mile straight-line buffers around 163
public schools in Baltimore, Maryland. Results showed that
commercial access and mixed land uses increased the number 
of pedestrian crashes, likely because of the increases in
traffic volumes. Abdel-Aty, Chundi, and Lee (2007) examined
crashes involving school-aged children (aged 4 to 18) in
0.5-mile straight-line school buffers in Orange County,
Florida, and considered characteristics of drivers, pedestrians, 
cyclists, vehicles, and road environments. They found
that middle and high school children were more likely to be
involved in crashes on high-speed, multi-lane roads than
elementary school students. Warsh et al. (2009) explored the
factors related to child pedestrian collisions in school zones
and found that more crashes occurred at midblock than at
intersections. However, these studies did not control for the
influence of traffic volumes or school enrollment. Larger
schools with more students are expected to have more traffic
exposure than smaller schools. The effects of neighborhood
environments were not considered either.

Another issue in previous studies on this topic is that they
used only one specific buffer size and might be subject to the
Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP). MAUP relates to
scale and zoning effects: a scale effect exists when the use of
different sizes of spatial units generates different statistical
inferences; a zoning effect is present when different zone configurations 
in a fixed scale lead to different results (Openshaw
1984). These two effects can lead to biased results and generate 
inaccurate information for relevant policy decisions.

Research Design

To address these knowledge gaps, this study examines how
school siting and surrounding environments influence traffic
safety around schools using multiple spatial units of analysis.
The study sites are 120 public schools (including 77 elementary 
schools, 24 middle schools, and 19 high schools) in the
Austin Independent School District (AISD), Texas, and their
surrounding neighborhoods. The diverse school locations
and neighborhood development patterns provide a unique
opportunity to test the effects of school siting and neighborhood 
designs on crash rates.
A conceptual framework (Figure 2) was developed based
on the previous literature to guide the selection of study variables. 
Three domains of determinants—risk exposure, neighborhood 
sociodemographic characteristics, and surrounding
built environments—are hypothesized to be associated with
traffic safety. This study focuses on built environments (the
independent variables) and treats the other two domains as
confounding variables.
School parcels’ straight-line buffers were used as spatial
units of analysis. In determining the appropriate sizes of the
buffers, two issues were considered. First, to address the possible 
scaling effect of the MAUP issue, this study chose to
use multiple units with different sizes. If the results from
these different scales are relatively stable, this study will provide 
a greater level of confidence in the findings. Second,
this study referred to thresholds of feasible distance for walking 
and biking to school (D’Haese et al. 2011; Van Dyck
et al. 2010). As a result, 0.5-, 1-, 1.5-, and 2-mile straight-line
buffers around the school parcel were identified as spatial
units of analysis (Figure 3).

Data Sources

Seven-year (2004–2010) collision data were obtained from
the Austin Police Department (APD), which provided the
date that each crash occurred, the crash type (e.g., pedestrian–vehicle, 
cyclist–vehicle, vehicle–vehicle, etc.), and
injury severity (e.g., fatal, serious, minor, and no injury). The
GIS data sets for parcel-level land uses, streets, and sidewalks 
were obtained from the city of Austin. The land use
data provided land use classifications including residential
uses, commercial uses, office uses, parks, and others. The
traffic volume data for major highways and regional arterials
were collected from the Texas Department of Transportation

(TxDOT) and the data for arterials and local roads were collected 
from the city of Austin. The point data for transit stop
locations came from the Capital Metro–Austin Public Transit
website. For the sociodemographic information, this study
used 2010 census data and school enrollment information
from the Texas Education Agency Academic Excellence
Indicator System (AEIS) 2011–2012 report.

Because of limited data availability, some of the data sets
used in this study have different time frames. For example,
the crash data are from 2004 to 2010, while the school enrollment 
data are from the 2011–2012 academic year. However,
since the school enrollments in the AISD do not dramatically
change over years, it will not be a serious issue for the
analysis.

Variables and Measurements

Study variables were identified based on the systematic literature 
review and the proposed conceptual framework.
Table 1 lists the dependent variables, confounding variables, 
and independent variables and their corresponding
measurements.

Dependent Variables

Traffic safety in this study means crash rates for all traffic
around schools, including both school trips and nonschool
traffic. It is captured through rates of motorist crashes (i.e.,
vehicle–vehicle collisions) and pedestrian crashes (i.e.,
pedestrian–vehicle collisions). Because vehicles travel on

roads and pedestrians move along the sides of streets,
street-based measures (the number of crashes per unit of
street length) (LaScala, Gerber, and Gruenewald 2000;
LaScala, Gruenewald, and Johnson 2004) were preferred
over area-based measures (the number of crashes per area)
(Wier et al. 2009) in this study. As a result, the dependent
variables were measured by the number of pedestrian
crashes and the number of motorist crashes per unit of street
length, respectively.

Independent and Confounding Variables

Built environmental attributes were independent variables
for this study, including nonmotorized infrastructure (sidewalk 
completeness), street connectivity (three-leg and

four-or-more-leg intersection densities), transit service
(transit stop density), road types (percentages of highways,
arterial roads, and local roads), land use types (percentages
of areas designated for residential and commercial uses, the
percentage of residential uses along local roads, and the percentage 
of commercial uses along local roads).
Two other domains—risk exposure and neighborhood
sociodemographic characteristics—were considered as confounding 
variables. Risk exposure included school enrollment 
and types of schools (elementary, middle, or high
school). Traffic exposure in the buffer were measured by (1)
clipping the street layer by school buffers to get street segments 
inside the buffers; (2) multiplying the length of each
street segment by its corresponding average daily traffic volume 
to get the number of daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT)
for each street segment; (3) multiplying this daily VMT by
365 days and 7 years to estimate the VMT within the 7-year
period, for which crash data are available; and (4) finally
summing the VMTs in the buffer, and dividing it by total
miles of streets in the buffer.
With respect to neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics, 
this study included population density, race (% of
nonwhite population), age (% of population aged under 18),
education level (% of population with an education level
lower than high school), and income level (% of population
below the poverty line). Since the sociodemographic data
from 2010 Census was in census block group level, this
study used area apportionment methods (splitting the population 
in the census block group into the school buffer by the
fraction of the area of the school buffer in each census block
group) to calculate the corresponding information for each
school buffer.

Data Analysis

The descriptive statistics for dependent variables showed
that they were not normally distributed. Therefore, this

study used log-transformation to reach normal distributions
and then used log-linear regressions—a widely applied
method in traffic safety research (Abdel-Aty, Chundi, and
Lee 2007; Lee and Abdel-Aty 2005; Miranda-Moreno,
Morency, and El-Geneidy 2011)—to predict motorist and
pedestrian crash rates. Four models with different spatial
units of analysis (0.5-, 1-, 1.5-, and 2-mile school buffers)
were run for each outcome variable (motorist crash rate and
pedestrian crash rate).

Results

Table 2 presents the results of four regression models that
predict motorist crash rates. The goodness of fit for these
four models was consistently high (>0.731), but the individual 
results for some of the independent variables showed
variations across the four spatial units.
School characteristics such as enrollment and type of
school were not significant across the four models. Most

neighborhood sociodemographic variables were not significant 
either, except population densities and the percentage 
of nonwhite populations. Built environmental
variables showed some significant results. While three-leg
intersections were insignificant in all four models, four-or-more-leg 
intersections showed positive associations with
motorist crash rates in the 1- and 2-mile models.
Surprisingly, sidewalk completeness showed a positive
association with the motorist crash rate in the 0.5-mile
model. Traffic exposure, transit stop density, the percentage 
of highways, the percentage of commercial uses, and
the percentage of commercial uses along local roads
showed consistent, positive associations with motorist
crash rates across all four models. In contrast, the percentage 
of local roads showed consistent, negative associations
in all four models.
In terms of pedestrian crash rates (Table 3), the goodness
of fit for these four models was also consistently high
(>0.746). School enrollment and type of school had no
effect on pedestrian crash rates. Higher population density
consistently increased the rate of pedestrian crashes in the
four models, while the percentage of nonwhite populations
only had positive effects in the 1- and 1.5-mile models.
Among built environmental variables, sidewalk completeness 
was negatively associated with pedestrian crash
rates across the four models. The densities of three-leg and
four-or-more-leg intersections showed insignificant results,
except for the four-or-more-leg intersection density in the
2-mile model. The percentages of both highways and arterial 
roads had positive effects in the 1- and 1.5-mile models.
Traffic exposure, the density of transit stops, the percentage
of commercial uses, and the percentage of commercial uses
along local roads were positively associated with the rates
of pedestrian crashes in all models, while the percentage of
local roads was a consistently negative correlate.

Discussion

This study considered four different spatial units of analysis 
in order to explore the potential scaling effect of the
MAUP issue. Some variables (e.g., four-or-more-leg intersections, 
arterial roads, residential uses, etc.) showed
inconsistent results across four units, and might be subject
to this scaling effect. Some other variables (e.g., sidewalk
completeness, highways, local roads, commercial uses,
and transit stops) showed relatively stable results across
the four models, providing more confidence for the interpretation 
of their impacts, which will be further discussed
below.

Traffic Exposure and Density

Traffic exposure is positively associated with motorist and
pedestrian crash rates. This finding is consistent with those
from previous studies (Dumbaugh and Rae 2009). Population
density, as a proxy measure of risk exposure, was also

positively related to the rates of motorist and pedestrian
crashes. This findings is consistent with results from some
previous studies but differ notably from a proposition raised
by previous studies (Ewing and Cervero 2001) and needed
more critical analysis. Since the measure of crash rate was
different between this study (crash per area) and Ewing’s
study (crash per person), the relationship between density
and crash rate (per area vs. per person) may be different. It is
possible that high-density areas with short links to destinations 
generated low numbers of vehicle miles traveled per
capita (which decreased crash per person) but had more people 
commuting and led to more total traffic volumes in the
area (which increased crash per area). Moreover, the relationship 
between density and traffic volume may not be linear. 
It is possible that traffic volume decreases when the
population density reaches certain thresholds, and this
threshold has not been reached in Austin.

Sidewalks

Higher percentages of sidewalk coverage were found to be
associated with lower rates of pedestrian crashes. School
areas with completed sidewalks offer connected nonmotorized 
infrastructure, which in turn increases pedestrian safety.
Disconnected nonmotorized infrastructure may force pedestrians 
to walk on the street or the shoulder, which may cause
traffic conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. A
California study asserted that a large number of pedestrians
walked on sidewalks rather than on streets after sidewalk gap
constructions resulting from the Safe Routes to School
(SRTS) programs (Boarnet et al. 2005).

Highways

Highways are designed for high operating travel speeds with
wide and straight lanes. Having these high-speed roads close
                   
to schools may lead to traffic safety issues. One possible          
explanation is the speed differential between highways and          
local roads when vehicles enter or exit highways. Because           
68% of the roads around schools (within 0.5 mile) are local         
roads in the study area, vehicles with high travel speeds on        
highways have to decelerate before they enter local roads.          
This speed differential may cause conflicts among vehicles          
entering/exiting highways or local roads, thus leading to           
more motorist crashes. Another possible reason is the large         
amount of traffic generated by highways, especially during
the peak period, which increases the crash risk around the
									
school area.
									
									
Local Roads                                                         
The benefit of local roads for traffic safety around schools        
was identified in this study, and may be due to their low traffic speeds. 
Narrow local roads decrease vehicle speeds,             

reducing stopping sight distances and giving drivers more
time to react to unforeseen hazards (Ewing and Dumbaugh
2009). If roads around schools are designed for high operating 
speeds, it is difficult for drivers to avoid crashes in school
areas, where vehicles and pedestrians are mixed in traffic
during peak hours. A study in Orange County, Florida,
reported that vehicles with higher speed ratios (estimated
speed / speed limit) caused more crashes involving schoolaged 
children (Abdel-Aty, Chundi, and Lee 2007).

Commercial Uses

A higher percentage of commercial uses was associated with
more motorist and pedestrian crashes, which is consistent
with the results of a previous study in Baltimore, Maryland
(Clifton and Kreamer-Fults 2007). Commercial uses lead to
more vehicle miles traveled (the correlation coefficient
between commercial uses and travel volume in this study is

0.259, p < 0.05) and more pedestrian activities, which create
a mixed traffic environment that would have multiple effects
in school areas because schools also act as trip attractors.
In addition, locating more commercial uses along local
roads instead of other road types around schools was associated 
with more crashes. One possible explanation is the typical 
auto-oriented design for access to commercial uses in the
study area. Most commercial uses in the AISD are located in
shopping plazas with large parking lots, which generate a
large volume of vehicle traffic and increase the conflicts
between pedestrians and vehicles. Future studies should
examine the differences between auto-oriented and pedestrian-oriented 
commercial uses in terms of their impacts on
traffic safety around schools. Another possible reason may be
conflicts between traffic to/from commercial uses and traffic
to/from schools. A closer examination of crash locations
revealed that 65% of crashes occurred on road segments adjacent 
to commercial uses or schools. Figure 4 shows an example 
of pedestrian crash locations on a local road between a
school site (right in the figure) and commercial uses (left in
the figure). In this case, drivers in and out of commercial or
school areas cannot quickly stop for pedestrian crossings,
even if they drive on local roads with low travel speed,
because there is (1) no clear driveway notification for drivers
and (2) no crosswalks for pedestrian passing. Moreover,
because commercial uses are usually set back from roads and
parking lots, driveway access is a potential location for conflicts 
among different users (Dumbaugh and Li 2011).

Transit Stops

Transit services provide personal mobility to individuals
traveling to and from school areas, especially for families
who live outside of walking distance to schools and have no
vehicles or school bus service. Transit stops also act as focal
points of travel activities and generate pedestrian activities.
This study found positive relationships between the density

of transit stops and motorist and pedestrian crashes. This
result is consistent with findings from two previous studies,
one in New York City (Ukkusuri et al. 2012) and the other in
Montreal, Canada (Miranda-Moreno, Morency, and
El-Geneidy 2011). In checking the locations of transit stops
around schools, this research found that 74% were located
along arterial roads in order to provide greater accessibility.
The possible problem associated with this design is the exposure 
of transit commuters to high-speed through traffic when
pedestrians need to cross these arterial roads. Thus, planners
need to use traffic-calming strategies such as the provision of
buffers between transit stops and vehicle roadways to promote 
traffic safety.

Implications for Practice

Findings from this study have important implications for
future planning of school and communities.

Planning a Low-Speed Environment around the
School Area

Planners should provide a low-speed-road environment
around the school area. Local roads placed around school
areas offer low-speed environments, which would enable
drivers to stop quickly for unexpected hazards.
To avoid safety threats from speed differentials among
different road types around schools, highways should be
located farther from schools. This road type emphasizes
mobility, encourages relatively high travel speeds, and carries 
large traffic volumes, all of which increase pedestrian
exposure to safety threats. If it is inevitable to have highspeed 
roads around school, planners should pay more attention 
to the design of these roads to ensure traffic safety.

Locating Commercial Uses Away from the School
Area

Commercial uses, which produce greater traffic volumes and
more pedestrian activities, should be located away from
schools to avoid a mixed traffic environment. Moreover,
commercial uses locating along local roads with low operating 
speeds also consistently increased motorist and pedestrian
crash rates across the four spatial units. A possible solution is
to provide pedestrian-friendly design instead of auto-oriented
design for commercial uses along local roads to encourage
walking and improve traffic safety around schools.

Connected Nonmotorized Infrastructure and
Pedestrian-Friendly Environments around Transit
Stops

School safety can be enhanced by providing connected
nonmotorized infrastructure around schools. Offering a

pedestrian-friendly environment could help manage traffic
conflicts and improve pedestrian safety. In response to this
concern, researchers have encouraged school facility and
land use planners to use Smart Growth strategies to build
school facilities, plan communities, and create safe streets
for both pedestrians and drivers (CEFPI and EPA 2004).
Strategies such as providing sidewalks and mounting medians 
can help reduce traffic-related deaths and injuries for
all users (e.g., motorists, pedestrians, and public transit
commuters) (CEFPI and EPA 2004).

Conclusion

This study examined the influences of built environments on
motorist and pedestrian crashes around schools and found
that schools surrounded by more commercial uses, transit
stops, and highways had higher motorist and pedestrian crash
rates.

A few limitations need to be addressed. First, this study
used all pedestrian and motorist crashes around schools as
outcome measures. Future studies should consider examining 
crashes involving children or only school travel-related
crashes to further understand school traffic safety. Moreover,
because this study primarily focused on the traffic safety, the
results and implications would try to maximize this function,
which may compromise other functions (e.g., transportation
planning) (Mehaffy et al. 2010).
Traffic safety around schools has been and will continue
to be an important topic for transportation engineers, urban
planners, and land developers. This study provides a starting
point, and also demonstrates the need for more detailed studies 
in this field.