Identifying Parent Perspectives
to Guide Active Travel Intervention
with Small Populations
Case Study in Denver, Colorado

abstract
This paper investigates a strategy for guiding school-based active travel
intervention. School-based active travel programs address the travel
behaviors and perceptions of small target populations (i.e., at individual
schools) so they can encourage people to walk or bike. Thus, planners need
to know as much as possible about the behaviors and perceptions of their
target populations. However, existing strategies for modeling travel behavior 
and segmenting audiences typically work with larger populations and
may not capture the attitudinal diversity of smaller groups. This case study
used Q technique to identify salient travel-related attitude types among
parents at an elementary school in Denver, Colorado; 161 parents
presented their perspectives about school travel by rank-ordering
36 statements from strongly disagree to strongly agree in a normalized
distribution, single centered around no opinion. Thirty-nine respondents’
cases were selected for case-wise cluster analysis in SPSS according to criteria 
that made them most likely to walk: proximity to school, grade, and
bus service. Analysis revealed five core perspectives that were then correlated 
with the larger respondent pool: optimistic walkers, fair-weather
walkers, drivers of necessity, determined drivers, and fence sitters. Core
perspectives are presented—characterized by parents’ opinions, personal
characteristics, and reported travel behaviors—and recommendations are
made for possible intervention approaches. The study concludes that Q
technique provides a fine-grained assessment of travel behavior for small
populations, which would benefit small-scale behavioral interventions.
Recent transportation policies, including bike shares, bikeways, and
safe routes to school programs, highlight public efforts to increase
the proportion of short trips made by walking or biking (1–3). Planners 
explain that these active travel modes offer a cleaner, greener,
and healthier alternative to automobile dependence (3–8).
To design policies and programs that will make walking and biking 
more attractive options than driving, planners need to understand
the extent to which various factors influence the travel behaviors and
perceptions of their target populations. Traditional quantitative travel
behavior research is well-suited for estimating behavioral tendencies
of large populations. However, programs that work in individual
schools and other organizations often deal with small, culturally

diverse populations. To guide small-scale programs, planners need a
better grasp of the behaviors and perceptions of those target groups
so they can encourage individuals to walk or bike.
The purpose of this study is to assess perceptions of travel alternatives 
with small populations that planners may target for behavioral
intervention. This paper presents findings from a study that used a
sorting exercise with case-wise cluster analysis to examine parents’
perceptions of travel to and from an elementary school in Denver,
Colorado. The study revealed five core perspectives: optimistic walkers, 
fair-weather walkers, drivers of necessity, determined drivers,
and fence sitters. By aligning the perspectives with intervention
approaches, findings from this study illustrate the capacity of the
research approach to guide small-scale intervention.

PREVIOUS RESEARCH

Planning research often describes travel behavior for school trips in
terms of a perspective that emphasizes the students’ opportunity to
walk to school in terms of key environmental barriers. This interpretation 
suggests that parents share a positive opinion of walking to
school but are unable to achieve that goal due to external constraints.
For example, several studies (3, 9–15) found that distance between
home and school was a key predictor of mode choice. The findings
implied that because travel behavior was significantly influenced by
distance, school districts would need to change their catchment areas
or enrollment policies to encourage students to walk. As another
example, several studies (3, 14, 16, 17) asked parents to pick from
among several reasons why they drive to school. Some (12, 16, 18, 19)
identified traffic danger and others (3, 14, 17, 19) identified stranger
danger as key obstacles to walking. Those findings would focus
intervention on one or the other problem, assuming that by removing 
the obstacle they could free people to walk who are otherwise
forced to drive.
Another study (20) used a mapping exercise to locate specific
environmental safety concerns and similarly concluded with recommendations 
that focused on traffic safety. By emphasizing opportunity-related, 
environmental barriers, much school travel research
assumes that parents generally want to walk their children to school,
neglecting other possible perspectives and attitudes that intervention
might address.
Other active travel research calls attention to personal factors
such as sociodemographic characteristics and attitudes (3, 4, 14, 18,
21) and recommends multiple intervention approaches in terms of

one or more segments of the target population. For example, Sener
et al. (4) found that Texas bicyclists generally chose to ride for exercise 
reasons. However, some riders were concerned about safety,
particularly older riders and riders who did not have appropriate signage 
or storage facilities along their routes. Akar and Clifton (22)
used principal components analysis to incorporate attitudes into
a choice model. Although their findings did not focus on segments
of the audience, they included several focus areas for intervention,
including traffic conditions, mechanical problems, way-finding,
lighting, and security. Beirao and Cabral (23) used factor and cluster
analysis on a Likert-scaled survey to identify seven broad perspectives 
about transportation, including need for control, status seeking,
desire to change the form of transportation, pro public transportation, 
desire to help the environment, and sensitivity to travel stress.
Although they did not make specific policy recommendations, they
used the study to examine attitudinal differences between men and
women with regard to transportation and suggested that behavioral
policy should focus on attitudes that can induce change. By describing 
travel behavior and perspectives in terms of various segments of
the population, research supports a tailored approach to intervention
that may increase its impact.
Travel-related planning research often uses statistical methods
and choice modeling to describe the travel behaviors and perceptions 
of large populations or of certain sociodemographic subgroups 
of large populations. For example, Sener et al. (4) used survey
data from 1,605 bicyclists from 100 cities across Texas. Akar and
Clifton (22) used data from an online survey with more than 1,500
people on the University of Maryland campus. Beirao and Cabral
(23) used data from 3,009 telephone interviews with residents from
the Porto region of Portugal. Although some planning problems
relate to large populations better than others, statistical studies fundamentally 
require large respondent pools to make claims within
certain confidence intervals.

Even studies focused on school travel, a seemingly small-scale
planning problem, generally rely on large samples to ensure validity. 
For example, McDonald (11) used data from the National
Household Transportation Surveys from 1969 to 2001. Martin and
Carlson (12) analyzed data from the 2004 Consumer Styles Survey
(n = 4,213). Hillman et al.’s (16) study included surveys of students
in five areas of England. DiGuiseppi (10) surveyed 31 schools and
had 2,086 respondents. In contrast to those studies, Joshi and
MacLean (17 ) interviewed only 378 students. However, their sample 
represented schools in several cities and shires around Oxford,
United Kingdom, and was not intended to describe behavior at a
single school. Of the examples described above, only Collins and
Kearns (20) surveyed parents from a single primary school but had
an impressive pool of 426 respondents because it was the largest
school in Auckland, New Zealand. This is significant because it
means the research often estimates the behavioral profiles of very
broad populations but provides guidance to interventions that target
small, specific subgroups of people. That practice raises the question 
of what types of behavioral profiles would be encountered with
the smaller groups and how those profiles might direct behavioral
intervention.

RESEARCH METHODS

This study used Q technique to examine parents’ perceptions of
travel alternatives for trips to and from an elementary school in Denver. 
Q technique is a research method for systematically exploring

patterns and connections between people’s perceptions (24–28).
Similar to traditional attitude-based research, it combines psychometric 
and operational principles with correlation techniques. The
method was introduced in 1935 by physicist–psychologist William
Stephenson as an alternative to the traditional scientific method that
would help him examine research subjects’ points of view about a
topic (25).
Q technique can be used for extensive studies that aim to identify
a range of viewpoints in a population but is oriented toward intensive
behavioral analysis of individuals or small groups of subjects (27,
28). In contrast to traditional survey methods, the purpose of Q technique 
is to establish the taxonomy of views rather than to weigh them
against each other in occurrence or to generalize them beyond the
scope of the study population. As a result, Q technique does not
require a large randomized sample of respondents, which makes it
ideal for small-scale research (27, 29). Brown (26) argued that even
for extensive studies, the number of respondents should not exceed
40. Addams and Proops (29, p. 21) explained the scope of sampling
for an extensive Q study:

As a consequence of the expectation of finite diversity, the number of
participants does not have to be large. What is required is that these
should be deliberately selected to reflect the widest range of potential
types of opinions in order to identify all factors [perspectives] that exist
in relation to the topic of research. (29)

Although Q technique has been used extensively in psychology,
policy sciences, and numerous other research fields, it has had little
exposure in transportation planning. Therefore, the next section of
this paper describes the method used in this study in detail, including
data collection and analysis procedures.

Data Collection

Q Sort Exercise

A Q sort exercise was the main tool used in this study to measure
parents’ perspectives of travel alternatives for school trips. The
exercise asked them to rate 36 statements on a continuum from “I
agree with these statements the most” to “I disagree with these
statements the most.” Each parent represented his or her complete
perspective by organizing the statements in a normalized distribution 
single centered around a mean score of zero (see Figure 1). By
imposing that distribution, the Q sort compelled parents to consider
the statements in relation to each other, rather than rating them independently, 
and made it possible to evaluate each parent’s perspective
as a whole (26, 27, 29, 30).

Q Set

Q sort findings are based on permutations of the set of statements
(Q set) included in the sorting exercise. Therefore, Q methodologists 
recommend that the Q set represent a wide range of issues
and policy angles commonly discussed about the topic of interest.
Additionally, the Q set should use language familiar to respondents
and should be small enough to be manageable for a short sorting
activity (26, 27, 29).
The Q set for this study included statements obtained through
content analysis of semistructured interviews with 65 parents from
11 Denver elementary schools that were part of a larger study. In

agreement with school district policy, parents were approached                                      
during drop-off and pick-up times, potentially skewing findings in                                
favor of the accompanying parents’ viewpoints. However, findings                                  
indicated that parents often alternated between accompanying children 
and sending them alone or with friends, suggesting that the                                  
behavior, and its corresponding viewpoints, were not discrete. Parents                              
were asked a series of open-ended questions about the journey                                
to school, including who makes decisions about the trip to school,                                
who accompanies children to school, what modes of travel they use                                 
to get to school, and conditions that might influence them to change                              
their travel routine.                                                                             

The interview transcripts were analyzed with Glaser and Strauss’s
(31) constant comparative technique of grounded theory, which
resulted in a Q set of 36 statements reflecting local perspectives about
travel alternatives for school trips (see Table 1). Although statements
were drawn from the language of interview respondents, they reflected
many of the environmental and personal issues identified in planning
literature on the topic, including opportunity- and propensity-related
facets of travel choice. These Q sets and instructions were prepared
in English and Spanish, were tested with colleagues and bilingual
school staff, and were adjusted for substantive clarity and accuracy
in translation.

Site Selection

This paper focuses on findings from research conducted at Edison
Elementary School, one of 11 study sites from a larger research project 
investigating school travel in Denver. Edison was selected as a
research site based on its participation in Denver’s 2007 through
2008 grant-funded Safe Routes to School noninfrastructure program, 
which indicated the school’s interest in increasing the proportion 
of trips made by walking or biking. The school’s participation
in Safe Routes to School also facilitated access to key informants,
which included school staff and parents.
The purpose of this research was to examine perceptions of travel
alternatives with a small, culturally diverse population. At the time
of study, Edison’s student body was divided almost evenly between
white and Latino students and had nearly one-half of enrolled students 
on a free and reduced price lunch program, indicating financial
need. Edison’s sociodemographic composition made it an appropriate 
study site to explore the use of Q technique as an alternative to
traditional survey methods.

Participant Selection

Q sorts were distributed to every household through Edison’s takehome 
folder system and returned through its administrative office.
In addition to the Q sorts, parents received a short questionnaire
about personal and household sociodemographic and travel behavior 
characteristics and two open-format questions asking them to
explain their perspectives. Each completed Q sort was coded to ensure
anonymity and matched to a contact sheet with parents’ and teachers’
names, phone numbers, and classrooms to eliminate duplicate entries
from families with multiple children.
At the time of the study, Edison had 461 enrolled students. A total
of 161 respondents, representing 278 students, returned the Q sorts
(minus 33 incomplete responses)—a net 60.3% response rate. While
this number of respondents would suffice for a traditional statistical
study, it was much larger than necessary for Q technique and required
an additional sampling strategy to limit the total number of cases
while reflecting the widest range of relevant perspectives.
Distributing the Q sort widely made it possible to purposefully
select a small number of participant cases based on a series of
characteristics relevant to travel behavior. From the overall respondent 
pool, 39 cases were selected for cluster analysis based on characteristics 
that made the parents theoretically more likely to walk
or bike their children to school. For example, the study included
parents who indicated that they lived less than 10 blocks from the
school, that they were not assigned to a route in the school’s bus
system, and that they did not have children in early childhood
education or kindergarten. On the basis of this sampling strategy,
study results would guide policy to focus attention on the “lowhanging 
fruit”—perspectives of parents whose circumstances
(opportunity-related conditions) favored walking or biking—and
would thereby increase the potency of intervention by addressing
propensity-related issues.
The resulting Q sample included the sociodemographic diversity
of the larger school population in terms of race and income, although
the numbers were not proportionally representative. The sample was
intentionally weighted in favor of households living nearer to the
school, which resulted in a greater proportion of white families with
higher household incomes. Despite the shorter distance between
home and school, a greater proportion of the selected cases drove at

least one way than in the larger respondent pool. This made it
important in the final stage to correlate factors to the larger respondent 
pool to determine how well each of the perspectives resonated
overall.

Data Analysis and Interpretation

Several types of specialized freeware are available to collect and
analyze Q sort data, including PQMethod, PCQ, FlashQ, and WebQ.
Their procedures and advantages are described in detail elsewhere
(32, 33). This study used the more conventional statistical software
SPSS 17.0 but used case-wise analytical techniques, which extracted
several core types of perspectives from the 39 selected Q sort cases
and correlated them with the larger respondent pool. Brunner and Lyn
(34) provide a detailed explanation of the advantages of case-wise
versus factor-wise analysis. Procedures for this study’s analysis are
described in detail below.

Identifying Factors

Q sort data were entered in table format with case numbers in the
first column and sorting scores for each of the 36 statements (-4 to
+4) in the remaining columns. They were analyzed in SPSS 17.0
using hierarchical clustering with Pearson’s correlation coefficient
and the complete linkage algorithm. (Hierarchical cluster analysis
was possible without further normalization because respondents
were instructed to complete the Q sort exercise using a normalized,
single-centered diagram.) This step produced a table of correlation
coefficients to indicate the degree of similarity (between 0 and
±1.00, with +1.00 indicating an exact match) when each new case
joined a cluster. It also produced an icicle dendrogram, which graphically 
presented the clustering of cases, and rescaled the correlations
to indicate the degree of difference between clusters (0 to 25, with
25 indicating the least similar). These initial results were instrumental 
in deciding the number of factors and in identifying their member
cases (see Figure 2).
To identify factors, it was necessary to locate significant divisions
between shared perspectives. As indicated by the dashed boxes on
the dendrogram, the first clear division occurred at about Level 24
on the distance scale (r = -.344), between the top 26 cases and the
bottom 13 cases. The top group showed three additional divisions at
Levels 22, 17, and 13, potentially indicating four meaningful factors
or shared perspectives. However, because Cases 35 and 37 combine
at r = .231, it was assumed that their shared perspective would be
too weak to include as an independent factor. Further analysis verified 
that interpretation, as the two cases shared a strong opinion
about only one statement. That meant the top group was divided into
three factors (labeled A, B, and C) with clusters of nine, eight, and
seven member cases each. The bottom group showed a clear division 
at about level 19 (r = -.084), making two factors (D and E) with
clusters of five and eight member cases each. Characterization of the
five factors reinforced this structure as described below.

Characterizing Factors

To characterize each of the five factors, scores for each of the 36 statements 
were calculated from the means of the scores of the factors’
member cases (see Table 2). Each factor’s profile was represented

by the mean scores for the 36 statements, just as each respondent                      
case’s profile was represented by the original scores to which the
parent assigned each statement during the sort.                                        
Each perspective was primarily characterized by the statements                      
and topics that achieved mean scores =<U+239F> 2.00<U+239F> . Statements and topics 
that achieved mean scores =<U+239F> 3.00<U+239F> were interpreted as “emphases,”                 
while those between<U+239F> 2.00<U+239F> and<U+239F> 3.00<U+239F> were interpreted as “mentions.”                  
Negative scores indicated shared disagreement. For scores <<U+239F> 2.00<U+239F> ,                   
nearing zero indicated either that members of the cluster did not                         
share their strong opinion or that they did share a weak opinion. As                   
indicated by shaded cells, each of the resulting factor profiles included              
between eight and 12 of the 36 original statements.                                    
Core perspectives were further characterized by household demographic 
and travel behavior data that were collected with the Q sort.                  
Sociodemographic factors that were collected include distance from                     
school, race and ethnicity, and income. Parents were also invited to                   
mark which of several travel characteristics applied but were not asked                
to rank or give numerical weight to the answers. Options included the                  
following: carpool, walk or bike in nice weather, allow child to travel                
with siblings or friends, drop off on the way to work, take the bus, drive                
both ways, and walk one way and drive the other.                                       

Additional Factor Analysis

Factors were further analyzed by correlating them with the larger
group (n = 161) of respondent cases. To that end, the original data
table was transposed so that the 36 statements appeared in the lefthand 
column and the respondent cases occupied the remaining
columns. The named factors (A, B, C, etc.) with their mean statement
scores were entered as new cases.
Each respondent case was assigned a best-fit factor based on its
highest correlation coefficient of the five. Only eight cases of 161
did not correlate to at least one of the factors at the p = .05 threshold
of significance, while 68% of respondents correlated to at least two
of the core perspectives at p = .01, and many correlated to several
perspectives at that level. This outcome suggests that several perspectives 
resonated well with that parent and could be used to influence 
travel decisions. Cross-tabulation of factors and the personal
and household sociodemographic and travel characteristics of their
best-fit cases provided additional insight into each of the factors’
perspectives about travel alternatives.
Conversely, each of the five factors was assigned two or three
best-specimen respondent cases that had the highest correlation

coefficients. Qualitative data from best-specimens’ questionnaires                  
were used to confirm factor profiles.                                               
																			
REVEALED PERSPECTIVES                                                               
AND POLICY DIRECTIONS                                                              
											
The substantive purpose of this study was to examine perceptions of                 
travel alternatives among small, culturally diverse populations that                
planners might target for behavioral intervention. The study assumes                
that several intervention approaches would be available to implement                
at the school and that some approaches would resonate better with                      
the attitudes and perspectives commonly found at the school. Relationships 
between perspectives and intervention approaches were not                 
mutually exclusive. Although it was not in the scope of this paper to               

review every possible intervention approach, several suggestions are
presented as examples.
On the basis of the analysis methods described above, this study
revealed five core perspectives at Edison Elementary School
about travel alternatives for school trips: optimistic walkers, fairweather 
walkers, drivers of necessity, determined drivers, and
fence sitters. Each perspective was preferred by 10% to 30% of
respondents (see Table 1). Most respondents had one or more perspectives 
with which they identified at a secondary level. Thus,
interventions tailored to individual perspectives would promise to
overlap in influence.
The five core perspectives are characterized below in terms of share
opinions and common personal and household sociodemographic and
travel characteristics. Intervention approaches are recommended based
on those profiles.

Perspective A. Optimistic Walkers

Optimistic walkers were enthusiastic about active travel. They
emphasized their desire for physical activity (Statements 18 to 20).
They mentioned psychological, health, and academic motivations
for walking (Statements 6, 17, and 22). They also mentioned social
environmental opportunities, such as trustworthy adults (Statements
12 and 33) and children (Statement 15) as well as physical environmental 
opportunities for active travel, such as safe walking routes and
mild climate (Statements 27 and 28).
Shared by 24.2% of the larger body of respondents, this was by far
the most common perspective for respondents living within six blocks
of the school and was the second most favored for those living between
seven and 10 blocks away. Close proximity to the school influenced
its demographic profile to include a higher proportion of white families 
than all but one other subgroup (fair-weather walkers). This subgroup 
also ranked second after fair-weather walkers in terms of
wealth, with 46.2% of the subgroup reporting annual household
incomes greater than $72,000.
This group practiced what it preached. A significant proportion
(64.1%) of this subgroup reported walking on nice days, and it was
most common for those who reported walking overall. It was also
favored by respondents who reported their children traveled with
siblings or friends. However, nearly one-quarter of respondents in
this subgroup reported carpooling (23.1%), which may account for
the higher companionship. Despite its emphasis on walking, about
one-third (35.5%) of this subgroup reported driving both ways and
nearly one-half (46.2%) reported dropping children off on the way
to work, which may or may not indicate car travel. These statistics
indicate that even within populations who walk, policy can aim to
increase rates of active travel.
An appropriate intervention approach to address this perspective
would be to monitor each student’s trips made by walking or biking
(either by self-report or by electronic tracking) and reward students
each week or each month for the highest number or longest consecutive 
number of walking or biking trips to school. Rewards may include
small consumer items, entries into contests, or schoolwide recognition.

Perspective B. Fair-Weather Walkers

Fair-weather walkers were generally positive about active travel but
recognized the convenience of car travel. They emphasized their desire
for physical activity (Statements 18 and 19) as well as an academic
motivation for active travel (Statement 22). They also emphasized the
safety of parents driving with children (Statement 31), which might
be interpreted to support walking or driving, in this context. They
mentioned social opportunities, including neighborhood children and
trustworthy adults (Statements 10 and 12) and the environmental
opportunity presented by a mild climate (Statement 28). In contrast to
their generally positive attitude toward active travel, they mentioned
the convenience of car travel (Statement 5).
Shared by 29.2% of the larger body of respondents, this was the
most common perspective for respondents living farther than 10 blocks
from the school and the most preferred overall. The demographic composition 
of this perspective’s subgroup was most remarkable in terms
of wealth. Overall, it was the most common perspective for respondents 
who reported earning annual household incomes greater than
$72,000 and least common for those earning less than $36,000. It had
the second highest proportion of white respondents after the optimistic
walkers.
Despite this perspective’s positive attitude about active travel, it
was most preferred for respondents who reported driving both directions 
or driving one way and walking the other. About one-quarter of
this subgroup (25.5%) reported carpooling, and just over one-half
(53.2%) dropped children off at school on the way to work. Although
it ranked lower than the other perspectives for active travel, about
one-third of this subgroup (34.0%) reported walking on nice days.
Biking instruction, storage facilities, and route maps would be
appropriate to encourage students and parents with this perspective to
use active travel modes and to become more familiar with safe paths
between home and school. Emphasis on biking would make the trip
less time-consuming than walking, addressing the greater travel
distance common to the group.

Perspective C. Drivers of Necessity

Drivers of necessity described walking or biking to school as a luxury 
that would proffer certain benefits but that was difficult to attain.
They emphasized saving money (Statement 25) and mentioned academics 
(Statement 22) as well as environmental stewardship (Statement 26) 
as motivations for walking. They also mentioned their
desire for physical activity (Statements 18 and 19) and environmental 
opportunities for walking, such as safe routes (Statement 27) and
a mild climate (Statement 28). In contrast, they mentioned parents’
time constraints (Statement 3), defended parents’ ability to drive
safely with children (Statement 31), and argued against children’s
ability to handle the trip alone (Statement 16).
The composition of this subgroup was not remarkable in terms of
ethnicity or in distance from the school. However, shared by 13.0%
of the larger body of respondents, this was the most common perspective 
for respondents reporting an annual combined household
income less than $12,000. Income levels were more evenly distributed 
within this subgroup than they were in the others, with about
one-fifth (19.0%) reporting less than $12,000 and about one-sixth
(14.3%) reporting more than $72,000.
Most travel behaviors for this subgroup were about average for
the larger respondent population. About one-half (52.4%) of this
subgroup reported driving both ways, about one-half (52.4%)
reported walking on nice days, more than one-quarter (28.6%)
reported walking one direction and driving the other, and more than
one-third (38.1%) took children to school on the way to work. This
subgroup was average in terms of children traveling with siblings
or friends.
Walking school buses would be an appropriate intervention to
address this perspective, because parents could alternate responsibility 
for traveling a short segment of each trip, rather than taking
responsibility for the entire trip twice each day. Since this group
emphasized environmental stewardship and saving money on gas,
it may also be appropriate to focus marketing campaigns on these
issues. For example, the school might count walking and biking
trips each month, calculate fuel and emissions savings associated
with those trips, and present the findings in newsletters or on a
banner at the school.

Perspective D. Determined Drivers

Determined drivers dismissed walking or biking to school as difficult 
and unnecessary travel alternatives. They emphasized dangerous
drivers (Statement 32) and bullies in the neighborhood (Statement
36) and claimed that the location of the school did not influence
where they chose to live (Statement 21). They also mentioned parents’ 
time constraints (Statements 1 and 3) as well as children’s

inability to negotiate the trip to school alone (Statement 16). Although
this group mentioned a social environmental opportunity presented
by trustworthy adults in the neighborhood (Statement 12), they
appeared to introduce it as a support of carpooling rather than active
travel. Their only expression supporting physical activity related to a
concern about children’s obesity (Statement 17).
This perspective was shared by 11.2% of the larger body of
respondents and was least favored overall. Similar to the drivers
of necessity, the demographic composition of this subgroup was
not remarkable in terms of ethnicity or in distance from the
school. The income distribution is roughly average for the larger
population.
One-half of this subgroup (50.0%) reported driving both directions,
and almost one-quarter (22.2%) reported walking on nice days, although
this perspective was not the most common for either characteristic. In
fact, it was the least preferred perspective for parents claiming to walk
on nice days (6.3%). Also, a smaller than average proportion (33.3%)
reported dropping children off on the way to work.
Intervention to address this core perspective should concentrate on
overcoming negative attitudes about active travel, in particular distinguishing 
the benefits of walking and biking to school from other forms
of physical activity (i.e., extracurricular sports and physical education
programs). For example, active commuting offers an excellent source
of cardiopulmonary and bone-strengthening exercise and can easily
be incorporated or maintained during adult life.

Perspective E. Fence Sitters

Fence sitters described benefits afforded by walking and by driving
and did not commit to either travel mode. They mentioned their
desire for physical activity (Statements 18 and 20) and expressed
that walking is more enjoyable than driving (Statement 6). They
mentioned an environmental opportunity for walking presented by
safe routes in the neighborhood (Statement 27). However, they also
mentioned concern for children’s ability to negotiate the trip alone
(Statement 16) and several social and environmental obstacles to
active travel, such as unsafe drivers, strangers, and bullies (Statements 
32, 33, and 36) and unsafe crossings (Statement 29). In further 
support of driving, they described it as convenient (Statement
5) and argued that parents drive children safely (Statement 31) and
that they are not concerned about obesity (Statement 17).
Shared by 17.4% of the larger body of respondents, this was the
most common perspective for Hispanic parents and for those who
reported combined annual household incomes between $12,000
and $36,000. This perspective stands out because, unlike the larger
population of respondents, it was evenly distributed among the four
distances from the school and between the two dominant racial and
ethnic groups.
This was among the least common perspectives for respondents
who reported walking on nice days and for those who reported walking 
one way and driving the other. Proportions of this subgroup were
also significantly lower than average for children traveling with siblings 
or friends (3.6%), for carpooling (3.6%), and for driving both
directions (46.4%). It reported average proportions of parents dropping
children off on the way to work (42.9%).
An appropriate intervention to address this perspective would be
a walking buddy program to encourage students to travel with one or
more friends in their neighborhood. Similar to a walking school bus,
walking buddies would make students more visible to drivers at road
crossings and would provide safety in numbers for students who

walk near adult strangers or other groups of young people. The walking 
buddy program should also provide defensive instruction to the
students, helping them to first avoid but also respond appropriately
to threatening social situations.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Travel behavior research often uses statistical techniques that require
large data sets and that aim to capture the central tendencies and
behavioral influences of large populations or segments thereof. Those
methods are effective for guiding large-scale interventions because
they focus attention on the few key environmental factors that
are strongly associated with travel behavioral trends and that might
be manipulated through urban design or planning initiatives.
However, the same techniques may be less effective at guiding
school-based active travel programs. Individual schools’ enrollments
are too diverse to narrowly focus intervention on central behavioral
tendencies. Yet, they are too small to use traditional statistical methods 
of audience segmentation based on sociodemographic groupings.
A research approach is needed that can target intervention to the
diverse perceptions of the school commute that occur within individual
schools.
The purpose of this study was to explore the use of Q technique
for assessing perceptions of travel alternatives with small populations
that planners might target for behavioral intervention. The main data
collection tool for the study was a Q sort exercise composed of
36 statements about a wide range of issues relating to school travel.
Q sorts completed by parents at Edison Elementary School were analyzed 
first by case-wise cluster analysis (n = 39) and then by correlation 
with the larger respondent pool (n = 161). Results indicated five
core perspectives that guided the selection of several intervention
approaches appropriate to the school’s diverse community.
The intervention approaches recommended by this study primarily
focus on improving perceptions of active school travel, with secondary
attention to route safety. In that respect, the recommendations contrast
with some active travel programs, which conflate intervention to
encourage walking or biking with intervention to improve route safety.
(For example, the Safe Routes to School programs emphasize improving 
route safety to encourage pedestrian activity.) This paper emphasizes 
that the two objectives (more active commuting and safer routes)
are discrete while upholding the relevance of both types of intervention. 
The propensity-related focus of this study’s recommendations
reflects findings that in all but one core perspective parents agreed that
there were already safe routes to walk or bike between their homes and
the school. Despite the opportunity to walk safely, many parents chose
to drive children one or both ways to school.
Similar to the traditional large-scale quantitative active travel
research, this study describes travel behavior in terms of an assortment 
of environmental and personal correlates. For example, both
approaches acknowledge the possible influence of dangerous street
crossings, strangers, and time constraints in parents’ decisions about
travel mode. However, in contrast to traditional research, this study
emphasizes differences in the ways parents experience and prioritize
those correlates and targets intervention based on those differences.
The intervention approaches could be applied independently or as
part of a multifaceted active travel program. They should be administered 
broadly (by grade level or schoolwide) rather than targeting
sociodemographic or geographic subgroups of the population. While
certain core perspectives were favored by respondents living a certain 
distance from the school or from a certain racial or ethnic
background or income level, they were not defined by those factors
per se. The broader application has two main advantages: overlapping      
intervention and public awareness.
First, although parents were assigned to the core perspective with     
which they correlated most strongly, most parents also correlated
with other perspectives to a lesser degree. That suggests that while
a single perspective-based intervention approach might resonate              
most strongly with the 15% to 25% of parents included in its subgroup, 
it would still affect other parents, overlapping the spheres of
influence for each intervention.                                              
Second, the study assumed that parents largely determined their
children’s travel mode for school trips. Because the research identified 
parents’ perspectives of travel alternatives (as opposed to            
students’ perspectives), activities and outcomes related to interventions 
would need to be directly observable by or reported to parents
to affect their decisions about school travel. A broadly administered, 
multifaceted active travel program would be likely to gain the         
attention and participation of parents.
Q technique as described in this study provides a fine-grained
assessment of travel behavior for small populations that may benefit
small-scale behavioral interventions. To be clear, that does not mean         
the findings from this study may be generalized beyond the parents
of Edison Elementary School. This study’s findings are context sensitive, 
including the core perspectives and the suggested tailored
intervention approaches. Rather, the technique for ascertaining those
findings may be recommended for guiding behavioral intervention               
with other types of small populations. The technical difficulty (i.e.,
ensuring adequate response rates) and cost of the survey-style data           
collection and analysis procedure approximate other traditional
research techniques. However, case-wise cluster analysis of the Q sort
provided rich profiles of core attitude groups within the small population 
that could guide active travel programs to target specific,           
relevant perspectives with appropriate intervention approaches.


