ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION IN K-8 PEEL SCHOOLS
Are you a parent living in the Region of Peel, with children in kindergarten to grade 8? Use the active transportation resources on this page to get
moving to and from school in healthy and active ways!
We encourage teachers to take advantage of these resources too! You can use them in class and share with students and their families.
What is Active Transportation?
Active transportation means using people power to get where you’re going!
You can use your feet, bike, scooter, or any other form of non-motorized vehicle to get you to your destination.
Did You Know?
Active transportation …
                 Helps to promote well-being and positive mental health, including reducing day-to-day stress.
                 Increases physical fitness/activity, including helping to lower risks of chronic disease such as obesity and/or diabetes.
                 Increases the ability to learn, improves concentration, and helps your children do better in school.
                 Helps to reduce traffic congestion in and around school zones, which means safer streets for everyone.
                 Helps to reduce your climate impact and the harmful effects of air pollution.
Make Active Transportation Your #1 Choice
                 Make walking or rolling to school your first choice!
                 If it were up to the kids, they would choose walking or rolling to school as their first choice. Why not make it yours too? Even if your
                 school is far from home, students can walk to the bus stop! Consider different ways a pick-up or drop-off routine could include stepping
                 out of your car and completing your journey to school by walking or rolling.
                 Plan and practice!
                 As a household you can begin to practice your route to school together. You can also encourage children to walk or roll on their own,
                 with siblings or friends, depending on their age and maturity.
More Ways to Get Your Family Involved
                 Use the resources below to help you gain more knowledge and comfort with active transportation.
                 Bookmark this page and check back often — we’ll be adding new resources regularly!

                 Reach out to your child(ren)’s EcoSchools or active transportation lead to see how you can support your
                 school and your community in promoting active transportation choices.
Resources
NEW! WALK AND ROLL TO SCHOOL: A GUIDE FOR PARENTS
This new guide from Region of Peel includes tips and resources to make walking and
rolling to school easier for you and your family. DOWNLOAD NOW
HIGHLIGHTS:
           Benefits of Walking and Rolling to School
           Walking Skills Checklist
           School Travel: Myths vs Facts
HELPFUL BIKING VIDEOS FOR PARENTS
Use these videos to help get the whole family’s bikes ready to go for the season. Complete an ABC Quick Check before you head out for your ride.
More videos to come — stay tuned!
          ABC Quick Check “A”
          ABC Quick Check “B"
          ABC Quick Check “C”
          ABC Quick Check “Quick Check”
ACTIVITIES: Active Transportation BINGO!
Get everyone in the household familiar and comfortable with the active route to school by playing this fun BINGO game!
Play as often as you can, using all the different modes of active transportation before the start of the school year, so that the whole family is ready to get
walking and rolling!
We’ve created three different cards. To keep the game fresh, download a different card for each member of your family, or select a new one each time you
play!
Region of Peel and Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA), in partnership with local Peel organizations, have designed a webinar for
teachers, administrators, and parents of Peel students to learn more about and be better prepared to help youngsters become more active on their
commutes to and from school.
USEFUL LINKS
  Bike Brampton
  Peel Safety Village
  Walk and Roll Peel
MORE RESOURCES COMING SOON!

