Active School Travel                                      
 NSTS and Niagara Region Public Health have                
 partnered for several years to provide Active School
 Travel programs to local schools. IN 2018 we received     
 a grant from Ontario Active School Travel to support      
 enhanced programs.  New for the 2020-21 School YearEncouraging Active School Travel to SchoolThe Ministry of Education and Niagara Region Public Healthencourage families to chose active school travel, and walk, bike, scoot or skateboard, to schoolto reduce congestion is school loading zones and to easepressure on bussing demands.If you need to drive, consider a safe drop-off location awayfrom the school and let your child(ren) walk the last fiveminutes. This drive to five program has been adopting inother areas of Ontario, Canada and Internationally.
                                                           
 In the 2019-20 school year, we supported 26              
 elementary schools and with the grant we were able to     
 collect data to understand the model of travel of         
 students to school, complete walkabouts in school         
 communities with partners, pilot a walking school bus
 and enhance pedestrian safety resources (/walk-           
 zone/pedestrian-safety-video).                            
                                                           
 We have more work to do to support students walking      
 and wheeling to school. For more information, please
 email AST@nsts.ca.                                        
 Why Active School Travel                                  
 If you live in your school’s walk zone, your child can
 enjoy many benefits of a walk to and from school such
 as:
         Boosting readiness to learn and academic performance                              
         Decreasing levels of stress                      
         Increasing levels of happiness
 On days when you may need to drive, consider a safe
 drop off location away from the school and let your child
 walk the last five minutes. This will allow them to enjoy
 the benefits of physical activity and help you avoid
 congestion around your school.

Walking to school is faster than you think                
While you try out a walking route with your child, you cancheck their readiness using the Sidewalk Smarts Passport
Walking home from school can take less time than              
driving, especially if you have to arrive early to find a  
parking spot. You can practice a route with your child
and time it as a way to prepare for the journey to            
school. Most families who live within 800 metres of
school can walk there in only ten minutes.                    
School Crossing Guards
Your municipality provides School Crossing Guards, to        
help with your child’s journey to school. Keeping
children safe is their number one priority. Click HERE to learn more about your school's crossing guard. 
Cycling Safety EducationHeart Niagara provides cycling safety education toGrade 5 and 6 students in schools throughout Niagara. Thisyear this in school program may not be possible.Heart Niagara is working on online tools to supportcontinued student cycling safety education. Please checkback here later in September 2020.                        