The Walk Zone
School Travel Planning (STP) brings communities together to create better school
commutes. The two main goals of STP are to reduce traffic at schools and to encourage
more families to use active transportation modes like walking, cycling, and scootering, for
their school journey.
The School Travel Planning process is guided and supported by an STP facilitator who
brings municipal, school, and community stakeholders together to identify and resolve
issues with active school travel.
Depending on the speci c school circumstances, these stakeholders may include
transportation specialists, Bylaw officers, crossing guard leads, urban planners, police,
parents, students, school administrators, neighbourhood associations and community
centre leaders. The facilitator also coordinates activities that may include education,
encouragement, engineering, and enforcement interventions designed by the School
Travel Planning committee.
The School STP Committee
The school-based STP Committee identifies
the problems that stop people from choosing
active transportation, and chooses or creates
actions to solve those problems. Most
importantly, they roll up their sleeves and
implement these solutions.
Explore some solutions.
(https://www.stswr.ca/walkzone/school-
travel-planning/solutions/)
What might members expect to
do?
     Students – share the perspective of a student pedestrian and help brainstorm
     creative solutions.
     Parents – know their school and the community better than any expert; and they
     know what interventions have a chance of helping within those cultures.
     Neighbours – understand how residents are a ected by the school commute and can
     help identify unique solutions.
     School Administrators – provide knowledge of school community and access to
     communications.
     Teachers – have an in-depth understanding of their students and insight on how to
     integrate active school travel into school activities.
     Community Centre leads – know best practices for community outreach and are
     fully aware of community demographics and needs.
     Neighbourhood Association representatives – provide knowledge of the
     neighbourhood and can communicate broadly across the community.
     STSWR Facilitator – provides resources and advice, helps organize events and
     programs, and connects with subject matter experts to help school committees get
     the attention they need.
The Regional STP Steering Committee

This group meets regularly to discuss issues that affect a broad range of schools and to
support school events, system-wide programs, data collection, and specific engineering
and enforcement interventions.
Who serves on this committee?
     Manager of Planning, WRDSB
     Manager of Planning, WCDSB
     Manager of Transportation, City of Cambridge
     Supervisor of Crossing Guards, City of Kitchener
     Director of Transportation, City of Waterloo
     General Manager, STSWR
     STP Supervisor, STSWR
Supporting Stakeholders (consulted as needed)
     Region of Waterloo Public Health (educational materials)
     Region of Waterloo Transportation (lighting, roadwork, trail development,
     roundabout guidance, educational materials)
     Region of Waterloo Transportation Demand Management (transit connections,
     cycling support)
     Ministry of Transportation (small project funding, educational materials)
     Municipal Trails Staff (trail development)
     Municipal Operations Staff (winter maintenance, brush clearing)
            This work is made possible in part through nancial support from
               Green Communities Canada and the Government of Ontario.