                     The Middlesex-London Health Unit is currently in the Orange-Restrict level
         COVID-19 Info | Information sur la COVID-19 | COVID-19 Self-Assessment | COVID-19 Lab Results
  <U+F015>
                                                                                   Text Only   <U+2399>
School Travel Planning
What is School Travel Planning (STP)? STP encourages active transportation to and from school by developing an action
plan to build upon strengths and work to remove concerns around your school.
Characteristics of STP
       Sustainable 5-step process
       School ownership
       Supportive partnerships
       Comprehensive process
       School-specific concerns identified
       Ongoing action plans
Find out more about:                                                        Literature Review and Policy
                                                                            Scan
       The 5-step STP process and getting started
                                                                            Improving Safety of Active School
       See schools (past and present) with STPs
                                                                            Travel Through Decreasing Traffic
       Success Stories of schools making a difference
                                                                            Speeds
                                                                            Active & Safe Routes to School (ASRTS)
School Travel Planning Manual                                               Partnership of Elgin-St. Thomas, London,
                                                                            Middlesex, and Oxford.
Green Communities Canada is the innovator of School Travel
Planning. The process and resources found within our local
                                                                                         Download (PDF)
School Travel Planning Manual have been adapted from the
national School Travel Planning Toolkit to be specific to the
Elgin, Middlesex and Oxford communities.
A printed copy of the School Travel Planning (STP) Manual is available for any school within the municipalities of Elgin,
London, Middlesex, Oxford or St. Thomas, that is undertaking a School Travel Plan.
Please Contact Us if you are interested in starting a STP and are in need of your own copy of the STP Manual.

Benefits of Active Transportation
      Improves physical and mental health
      Improves traffic and safety around your school
      Improves air quality and helps the environment
      Has students arrive at school alert and ready to learn
      Increases connection to your community
Additional benefits to active transportation
Learn more about School Travel Planning and other Active & Safe Routes to School (ASRTS) programs, visit our local (St.
Thomas, Elgin, Middlesex, London, Oxford) website at http://activesaferoutes.ca.
Date of creation: July 4, 2013
Last modified on: September 30, 2019
Resources
      Improving Safety of Active School Travel through Decreasing Traffic Speeds - Middlesex-London Health Unit
<U+EC00>     (2016)
References
1Green  Communities Canada (2011). Active & Safe Routes to School. Retrieved from
      http://www.saferoutestoschool.ca/#

