                                                             Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
                                                                Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                                                        Journal of Transport & Health
                                                      journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jth
Factors affecting parental safety perception, satisfaction with
school travel and mood in primary school children in
the Netherlands
Pauline van den Berg a, *, E. Owen D. Waygood b, Iris van de Craats c,
Astrid Kemperman a
a
  Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands, P.O.Box 513, 5600MB, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
b
   Polytechnique, Montr<U+FFFD>eal, Canada
c
  Hevo, ‘s-Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands
A R T I C L E I N F O                                         A B S T R A C T
Keywords:                                                     Introduction: An increasing number of studies in transportation research have recently focused on
Children                                                      well-being and travel satisfaction. These studies argue that satisfaction with travel is an indicator
Satisfaction with travel                                      of the trip’s contribution to subjective wellbeing of the traveler. Although the attention on
Subjective wellbeing
                                                              satisfaction with travel is increasing, relatively few studies have considered satisfaction with
Parental safety perception
School travel
                                                              travel of children. As children’s travel is strongly linked to distance and the built environment,
Path analysis                                                 they would be important additional considerations to such research. Therefore, this study looks
                                                              into the household, built environment and trip characteristics influencing satisfaction with travel
                                                              and mood among Dutch children attending primary school. Additionally, the study considers the
                                                              mediating effect of parental safety perception on satisfaction with travel and the relationship
                                                              between satisfaction with travel and mood.
                                                              Methods: In order to study these relationships, survey data were collected in the Netherlands from
                                                              660 children (7–12 years) and their parents. The data were analyzed using a path analysis.
                                                              Results: Findings show that parental safety perceptions are related to the age of the child, income,
                                                              perceptions of neighborhood infrastructure and social cohesion. Satisfaction with school travel is
                                                              higher when parental safety perception is higher, when it is sunny, when traveling with a friend
                                                              and when traveling by bike when this is the favorite transport mode. Satisfaction with travel is
                                                              related to children reporting a better mood.
                                                              Conclusion: These insights can be used by policy makers to create safe school environments
                                                              stimulating active travel, which in turn will improve satisfaction with travel, well-being and
                                                              health among primary school-going children.
1. Introduction
       The aim of this study is to analyze the factors influencing satisfaction with travel and mood among children attending primary
school. Previous research has examined how different modes affect satisfaction with travel to school and have found that active travel
   * Corresponding author.
       E-mail addresses: p.e.w.v.d.berg@tue.nl (P. van den Berg), Owen.Waygood@polymtl.ca (E.O.D. Waygood), iris.vandecraats@hevo.nl (I. van de
Craats), A.D.A.M.Kemperman@tue.nl (A. Kemperman).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2020.100837
Received 30 July 2019; Received in revised form 20 November 2019; Accepted 12 February 2020
Available online 28 February 2020
2214-1405/© 2020 The Authors.                        Published by Elsevier Ltd.       This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                                 Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
is generally positively related (e.g. Westman et al., 2017; Friman et al., 2018; Stark et al., 2018). What explains children’s active travel
is proposed to be understood through frameworks based on a socio-ecological model of behavior (e.g. Sirard and Slater, 2008; Mitra,
2013). Reviews on the topic find that factors such as distance and parental concerns about traffic and personal security diminish such
travel (Mitra, 2013). If a parent is concerned about traffic or personal security, those fears can be passed on to the child (Waygood and
Manaugh, 2019), which may result in decreased satisfaction with travel due to stress. Further, if a trip is highly satisfying (or the
inverse), it may influence the child’s mood which could have implications for how they perform at school. Previous research has found
that active travel can make children more alert (Westman et al., 2013; Hillman et al., 2009) and more ready to learn. Thus, in this
study, how parental safety perception affects children’s travel satisfaction, and how that in turn affects mood will be examined for trips
to school in the Netherlands. Finally, this study is the first to study children’s satisfaction with travel in the Dutch context.
    Several studies have shown that active and independent travel among children is decreasing and children are increasingly
transported to school in the backseat of the car. This is an unfavorable development, because active travel provides important health
and well-being benefits and the increasing numbers of cars around schools cause safety issues (Waygood et al., 2017b). Most research
on children’s travel behavior focuses on the consequences this has on physical health, while studies on the psychological consequences
are still scarce (e.g. Westman et al., 2017; Friman et al., 2018; Stark et al., 2018; Waygood et al., 2018). Understanding the factors
affecting children’s psychological well-being related to their travel may provide important suggestions for policy-makers on how to
improve quality of life in cities.
    In transportation research there is a growing interest in well-being and travel satisfaction. Several studies argue that satisfaction
with travel is an indicator of the trip’s contribution to subjective well-being of the traveler. The subjective well-being of an individual is
their personal evaluation of their life. Despite the increasing attention for satisfaction with travel, relatively few studies have
considered satisfaction with travel of children.
    Finally, in terms of mood, previous research with adults in the USA (Morris and Guerra, 2015) and in the Netherlands has found
that cycling is the most positively related mode in terms of improving mood (Lanc<U+FFFD>     ee et al., 2017). However, how satisfaction and mood
interact is not well studied. Ettema et al. (2017) have studied how different modes and conditions might affect mood, but not whether
satisfaction with travel affects mood. Westman et al. (2017) examined whether travel mode influences satisfaction with travel to school
and current mood of children, but did not find an influence of mode on mood, though longer trip times decrease mood.
    This study presents a path analysis estimated in order to study these important influences of children’s travel on their satisfaction
and mood. The analyses are based on survey data collected from 660 children of 14 primary schools in the Netherlands in grades 5–8
(7–12 years) and their parents. In the next section the conceptual considerations of this study are discussed in the light of existing
literature. In section 3 the data collection methods and sample are presented, followed by the analysis methods and results in section 4.
The final section presents the conclusions and implications of the study.
2. Conceptual considerations
    In transportation research an increasing number of studies have recently focused on well-being (e.g., Ettema et al., 2010; De Vos
et al., 2013, Delbosc, 2012; Nordbakke and Schwanen, 2014; Friman et al., 2017; Van den Berg et al., 2019). However, most studies
consider adults’ rather than children’s travel and well-being. According to Pollard and Lee (2003) and Waygood et al. (2017b) five
domains of children’s well-being can be distinguished, namely physical, social, psychological, cognitive and economic well-being.
Most research on children’s travel and well-being has focused on the consequences of reduced active travel on physical health and
well-being, while studies on children’s travel and psychological well-being are still scarce (Waygood et al., 2017b; Stark et al., 2018).
Psychological well-being encompasses many different measures of well-being including measures such as self-esteem, stress, happi­
ness, and mood (Westman et al., 2019). In some cases, subjective well-being will be used as a measure of psychological well-being with
measures related to affect, happiness, and satisfaction (e.g. Stark et al., 2018). The term subjective well-being is used as the individual
is making a subjective assessment of their current state.
    Subjective well-being can be distinguished into hedonic and eudaimonic well-being (e.g. De Vos et al., 2013). Hedonic well-being
has an affective component, characterized by a short-term emotional experience or mood (positive/negative feelings) and a cogni­
tive–evaluative component, which is a more long-term assessment of general life satisfaction (Diener, 2000). In contrast, eudaimonic
well-being represents personal growth and finding purpose or meaning in life (De Vos et al., 2013).
    The most commonly used scale to measure travel-related hedonic well-being is the Satisfaction with Travel Scale (STS) (Ettema
et al., 2011; Bergstad et al., 2011). This is a nine-item scale that measures both affective and cognitive satisfaction. It consists of six
affective items that distinguish positive activation versus negative deactivation and negative activation versus positive deactivation
and three questions about cognitive evaluation. Westman et al. (2017) adapted the scale to be understandable for children (STS-C).
    Bergstad et al. (2011) argue that daily travel affects the overall mood and satisfaction of an individual. In their study on how
subjective well-being of adults is impacted by daily travel, they found that travel satisfaction had a direct effect on cognitive as well as
affective subjective well-being. In addition, according to Ettema et al. (2011) satisfaction with travel can be considered as an indicator
of the trip’s contribution to subjective well-being of the traveler, which, is easier to measure than well-being in general.
    In this study we measure children’s satisfaction with their school trip, as well as their current mood. It is likely that having a
satisfying trip results in a better mood. On the other hand, being in a certain mood is likely to affect the way the trip is evaluated. We
will test both directions in our model. In addition, as the parental safety perception has been found to be very important in the decision
making process of independent travel and transport mode (e.g. Kerr et al., 2006; Veitch et al., 2017), it is likely to also affect children’s
travel-related well-being. We hypothesize that parental safety perception mediates the relationship between several environmental
characteristics and children’s satisfaction with school travel.
                                                                       2

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                              Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
    We consider the influencing factors of parental safety perception and children’s mood and satisfaction with travel from a socio-
ecological approach (Bronfenbrenner, 1979), which suggests that several layers of the child’s environment (personal characteris­
tics, household, social, physical and external environment) may be of influence. The socio-ecological approach has been widely used
by authors attempting to increase the understanding of the multi-level influences from the child’s environment on their travel behavior
(e.g. Curtis et al., 2015; Mitra, 2013; Panter et al., 2010).
    First, trip characteristics are likely to affect children’s satisfaction with travel. Several studies found an association between
children’s subjective well-being and their travel mode to school. Waygood et al. (2017b) report consistent findings of walking being
related to positive emotions and to lowering stress. Ramanathan et al. (2014) found active travel to school to be associated with
positive emotions such as feeling happy or relaxed, for children as well as for parents. Westman et al. (2017) also found that active
modes were associated with a higher degree of children’s satisfaction with travel than car travel. Stark et al. (2018) also found active
school travel to be related to psychological well-being.
    In the personal layer of the socio-ecological model we hypothesize that gender and age may influence parental safety perception,
and (indirectly) satisfaction with travel and mood. Existing studies revealed that as children get older, they generally gain more in­
dependence in travel (Carver et al., 2013; Curtis et al., 2015). This suggests that parents have fewer safety concerns when their children
are older. Age was also found to be associated with the experience of the trip to school; older children experience the least excitement
and quality of their trip (Westman et al., 2017). Boys have been reported to more often be allowed to travel independently than girls
(Carver et al., 2013), which results in more active travel participation. However, Kemperman & Timmermans (2014) found no as­
sociation between travel behavior and gender in the Netherlands, Cervesato and Waygood found no consistent relationship of gender
for independent travel in Canada (2019), and Waygood and Kitamura (2009) found no relationship of gender for Japan.
    Household characteristics such as socio-economic status have also been found to affect children’s travel behavior. For instance,
lower income was found to be associated with less active travel participation (Van Goeverden and de Boer, 2013). Aarts et al. (2013)
found that children in larger households cycle more often and children in households with more cars less often use active modes to
travel to school. These factors might also affect parental safety perception and children’s satisfaction with travel.
    The social environment has also been found to significantly influence children’s travel behavior. Aarts et al. (2013) found perceived
social safety and social cohesion in the neighborhood to be related to more active school travel. Similarly, Kemperman & Timmermans
(2014) found that children who live in neighborhoods that are perceived safe and have high social cohesion cycle more often. Waygood
et al. (2017a) suggest that having connections in the neighborhood decreases parental concerns, which in turn increases children’s
independent mobility.
    In addition, factors from the physical environment have been found to significantly influence children’s travel behavior. Not
surprisingly, distance to school is the most commonly found factor influencing school travel behavior. Living closer to school was
found to enable active travel internationally (e.g. McMillan, 2007; Panter et al., 2010) as well as in the Netherlands (Aarts et al., 2013;
Kemperman and Timmermans, 2014). Distance to school is likely to affect parental safety perception. Curtis et al. (2015) found
distance to influence whether or not children were allowed to travel independently, which might be an indirect effect of parental safety
perception.
    Finally, in the external layer, the weather may play a role. For instance, Buliung et al. (2011) found the weather to be one of the
reasons for Canadian parents to drive their children to school. For adults, weather has been found to play a role with both mood and
satisfaction for commute trips in Sweden (Ettema et al., 2017). Controlling for mood prior to the commute, valence (e.g., very sad to
very glad) was positively affected by temperatures above the monthly average and negatively affected by rain. A surprising result was
that there was a negative interaction between sunshine and using active (or slow in their terms) modes. Travel satisfaction was
measured with respect to quality, enthusiasm-boredom, and relaxation-stress. Positive influences were sunshine (across all three),
above monthly average temperature (relaxation), rain/snow (relaxation, quality), wind speed (enthusiasm), and interaction effect of
using public transport in the summer when it was raining. Negative influences were higher than monthly average temperatures for
public transport and active modes (relaxation), and again sunshine on active modes (relaxation, quality). The weather is also likely to
influence mood and satisfaction with travel in children.
3. Data collection
    For this study a survey was developed for primary school pupils and their parents. The survey for the children asked about the travel
mode to school that morning, the favorite travel mode, mood, satisfaction with travel that morning, the weather, and with whom the
child traveled to school. Mood was asked on a five point scale ranging from very happy to not happy at all. Emoticons were used to
make the survey more appealing to children. Satisfaction with Travel was measured using the Satisfaction with Travel Scale for
Children (STS-C) (Westman et al., 2017), translated to Dutch. It consists of the following nine questions which the children could
answer on a five point scale.
    What did you think of the trip to school this morning?
 1. A lot of fun – very lame
 2. Very easy – very difficult
 3. I learned a lot – I learned nothing
    How did you feel during your trip to school this morning?
                                                                       3

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                             Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
 4. Very bored – very excited
 5. Very indifferent – very much looking forward to the day
 6. Very tired – very well rested
 7. Very much at ease – very tense
 8. I had a lot of time – I was in a big hurry
 9. I was carefree – I was worried
    The survey questions for the parents asked about personal and household characteristics such as household composition and in­
come, distance to school, their perception of safety, and perceptions of the social and built environment, such as social cohesion, the
quality of the bike and walk paths, and street connectivity.
    To measure social cohesion in the neighborhood the following statements were used, again to be answered on a five point scale:
 1. People in this neighborhood are prepared to help each other;
 2. This neighborhood is a tight community;
 3. I trust the people that live in this neighborhood;
 4. Normally, the people in this neighborhood get along well;
 5. My child has a lot of contact with other children in the neighborhood.
    The parental safety perception considers three factors, namely the confidence in the travel skills of their children, the perceived
traffic safety of the route between home and school and the perceived social safety of the neighborhood. Parental safety perception is
measured using the following set of statements for which parents have to indicate on a five point scale to what extent they agree:
 1. My child is good at riding a bicycle;
 2. If my child walks to a destination, he or she pays good attention to other users of the road;
 3. If my child cycles to a destination, he or she pays good attention to other users of the road;
 4. My child is good at estimating potential danger in relation to traffic safety;
 5. There is so much traffic on the route to school that I find it unsafe to walk or cycle to school with my child;
 6. There is so much traffic on the route to school that I find it unsafe to let my child walk or cycle alone to school;
 7. I have the feeling that drivers of cars pay good attention to pedestrians and cyclists;
 8. If my child is alone outside, I fear that they might run into the wrong kind of people (people that are dangerous to my child);
 9. I find my neighborhood safe enough to allow my child to be outside by themselves.
    The scores for these statements of safety concerns are combined into one general parental safety perception variable.
    Regarding the quality and safety of pedestrian paths and bicycle lanes on the route from home to school parents were asked to
indicate to what extent they agree with the following statements on a five point scale:
 1. Most streets have safe bicycle lanes or are safe to cycle on;
 2. Most bicycle lanes and pedestrian paths are well maintained.
    To measure the street connectivity, parents were asked to what extent (on a five point scale) there are different routes in the
neighborhood that their child can take to get to school.
    The survey was distributed in the fall of 2018 at 15 primary schools in and around the Dutch city Arnhem that were located in areas
with different urban density levels. Arnhem is a moderately large and steadily growing city of 155,000 inhabitants in the east of the
Netherlands. To ensure variability between the types of schools and the types of school environments, several criteria were taken into
consideration in the selection of schools, namely urban density, size of the school, type of school schedule (do children have lunch at
school or not), and education vision of the school. A school board which manages 35 schools in Arnhem was approached. From their
schools, which are located in the city as well as the surrounding villages, 12 schools agreed to participate in the study. As these
included no schools in the lowest and highest urban density levels, approximately 10 additional schools were approached individually.
Of these, 3 agreed to participate in the study, which leads to a total of 15.
    All schools paper questionnaires as well as a note with clear instructions about the distribution of the questionnaires and the
collection of completed questionnaires, and a note with a brief instruction for teachers, including the answers to some questions and
confusions that children may have when filling in the questionnaires.
    All children in grades 5–8 (aged 7–12 years old) of the 15 participating schools received a survey in class in the morning. They were
asked to immediately fill in the first page of the survey. They were then asked to take it home and ask their parent to complete the rest
of the survey. According to Waygood et al. (2019) “children have been found to report consistently on life satisfaction questions above
grade 3 (ages 7 and 8) and it is weakly associated with social desirability response (Huebner and Diener, 2008).”
    The teachers or the principal collected the completed questionnaires that the children brought back to school after a week and the
researcher picked them up from each school. To improve the chances of a sufficient response rate, the principal was asked to send a
description of the research, including an explanation of the relevance (written by the researcher), to all parents via e-mail or another
digital platform.
    All parents gave their informed consent before participating in the study. In total, 676 surveys were collected that were completed
                                                                     4

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                            Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
by the children and their parents. Although 15 schools agreed to participate in the study, one of the schools did not receive any
completed surveys from the parents in their school. After removing some incomplete surveys, a final sample of 660 respondents
remained, resulting in a response rate of 46%. For more information on the data collection please refer to Van de Craats (2019). For
more details on the conditions of children’s travel in the Netherlands see van de Craats et al. (2019)
3.1. Sample characteristics
    Table 1 shows the sample characteristics. Age is quite equally distributed; only the seven-year-olds and the twelve-year-olds are less
common. Almost equal numbers of boys and girls participated. The largest share of respondents (43.3%) reported their household
income to be average; 38.2% had a higher income than average and 18.5% reported to have a lower income than average. Almost half
of the households have two or more cars and only 7.9% of the households in the sample did not own a car. This is similar to the
household car ownership pattern in the Dutch population. Three quarters of the respondents live in a household with two parents and
at least two children (75.6%). Half of the children in our sample have a school travel distance of 1 km or less. Around a quarter of the
Table 1
Sample characteristics.
  Variables                                                                                         N                             %
  Age                                             7                                                 27                            4.1
                                                  8                                                 140                           21.2
                                                  9                                                 180                           27.3
                                                  10                                                155                           23.5
                                                  11                                                132                           20.0
                                                  12                                                26                            3.9
  Gender                                          Boy                                               315                           48
                                                  Girl                                              341                           52
  Household income                                More than average                                 252                           38.2
                                                  Equal to average                                  286                           43.3
                                                  Lower than average                                122                           18.5
  Household car ownership                         No car                                            52                            7.9
                                                  One car                                           292                           44.2
                                                  Two or more cars                                  319                           47.9
  Household composition                           One parent – one child                            25                            3.8
                                                  One parent – more children                        75                            11.4
                                                  Two parents – one child                           61                            9.2
                                                  Two parents – more children                       499                           75.6
  Travel distance                                 <500 m                                            145                           22.0
                                                  500–1000 m                                        190                           28.8
                                                  1–2 km                                            172                           26.1
                                                  2–5 km                                            100                           15.2
                                                  >5 km                                             53                            8.0
  Transport mode used                             Bicycle (including kick-bike)                     315                           47.7
                                                  Walking                                           140                           21.2
                                                  Car                                               148                           22.4
                                                  Other (including public transport)                57                            8.6
  Preferred transport mode                        Bicycle                                           331                           51.2
                                                  Walking                                           117                           17.7
                                                  Car                                               119                           18.0
                                                  Other                                             86                            13.0
  Favorite mode used                              Yes                                               268                           40.6
                                                  No                                                392                           59.4
  Interactions                                    Favorite mode used * Bicycle                      172                           26.0
                                                  Favorite mode used * Walking                      43                            6.5
                                                  Favorite mode used * Car                          36                            5.5
                                                  Favorite mode used * Other                        17                            2.6
  Weather                                         Sunny                                             57                            8.6
                                                  Very cloudy                                       247                           37.4
                                                  Partly cloudy                                     282                           42.7
                                                  Rainy                                             72                            10.9
  Trip companions                                 Alone                                             155                           23.5
                                                  With friend                                       79                            12.0
                                                  With parent, sibling or combination               426                           64.6
                                                                                                    Mean                          St. deviation
  Quality bike/walk paths                                                                           3.24                          0.82
  Street connectivity                                                                               3.20                          0.96
  Social cohesion                                                                                   3.61                          0.60
  % low income in neighborhood                                                                      37.6                          15.81
  Parental safety perception                                                                        3.64                          0.55
  Satisfaction with travel                                                                          3.72                          0.59
  Mood                                                                                              3.88                          0.81
                                                                        5

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                                Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
respondents have a medium travel distance (1–2 km) and another quarter have a long travel distance (>2 km) to school. Almost half of
the children (47.7%) came to school by bicycle that morning. Around one fifth were brought by car and about the same percentage of
children walked to school. Only a small amount of children came to school by another mode, including taxibus, public transport or on
the back of a bicycle. Two fifths of the children used their favorite transport mode that day.
    For the majority, the bike is their preferred transport mode to go to school. Most children went to school with a parent, sibling or
combination of those two. Almost a quarter of the children went to school alone and 12% traveled with a friend.
    Cronbach’s Alpha was calculated to assess the internal consistency of the scale items for quality of bike/walk paths, social cohesion,
parental safety perception and satisfaction with travel. Cronbach’s Alpha is a function of the number of test items and the average
inter-correlation among the items.
    The two statements on the quality of the bike/walk paths had a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0.655, indicating moderate to good internal
consistency. They were combined into one variable taking the mean score on these statements.
    The four social cohesion statements had a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0.827. This value indicates that the four variables can be merged
into one social cohesion variable. This final social cohesion variable represents the mean of the responses given to the four social
cohesion statements.
    Regarding parental safety perception, the Cronbach’s Alpha analysis showed that the overall set of statements was properly
internally consistent with a Cronbach’s Alpha value of 0.779. This variable represents the mean response of parents to the 9 statements
of parental safety perception.
    Finally, regarding satisfaction with travel the Cronbach’s Alpha analysis indicated that it would be best to not include the second
and third item (about difficulty level and learning). The combination of the remaining seven items resulted in a Cronbach’s Alpha of
0.673, indicating moderate to good internal consistency. The final satisfaction with travel variable will therefore represent the mean of
the scores on items 1 and items 4–9 of the scale.
4. Analysis methods and results
    The aim of this study is to analyze the factors affecting children’s satisfaction with travel and mood and the mediating role of
parental safety perception. Fig. 1 shows the distribution of the endogenous variables in our model.
    In order to simultaneously estimate the effects of the explanatory variables on the dependent variables, as well as the relationships
between the dependent variables, path analysis is used. The path analysis model was estimated using the statistical software package
LISREL (Jo  €reskog and So€rbom, 2001). The maximum likelihood method was used to estimate the models.
    A number of different model specifications were tested, with different directions between mood and satisfaction with travel and
different explanatory variables. Variables (such as gender, household car ownership and household composition) that did not
significantly affect any of the endogenous variables were removed. The standardized coefficients of direct and total (direct þ indirect)
effects of the final model are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 2.
    The goodness-of-fit statistics of the model are reported in Table 2. To provide a good fit, the Chi-square statistic divided by the
degrees of freedom should preferably be smaller than 2 (Golob, 2001), or at least smaller than 5 (Washington et al., 2003). With a value
of 2.33, the model still has a good fit. The model has a root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) of 0.044 which also indicates
a good fit, as the value should preferably be less than 0.05 (Golob, 2001). The model’s goodness of fit index compares the fitted model
to the saturated model. The value should be close to 1 (Washington et al., 2003). With a goodness of fit index of 0.99 and an adjusted
goodness of fit index of 0.91, the model provides a good fit.
    Regarding the relationship between satisfaction with travel and mood, both directions (mood affecting satisfaction, and satisfaction
affecting mood) were tested in the model. The results indicate that satisfaction with travel affects mood. As expected, a positive
relationship is found, suggesting that if children are more satisfied with their trip to school, they feel happier. Ettema et al. (2017)
found that mood prior to the trip affected mood after the trip, but they did not test whether mood prior to the commute affected
satisfaction, or whether satisfaction with the commute affected mood directly after. Although we tested the relationships between all
other explanatory variables and mood, no other variables were found to significantly affect current mood. Mood is thus not affected by
weather, transport mode, or personal and household characteristics. Westman et al. (2017) found that only grade and long trips
influenced mood. However, no influence of age (grade) was found here.
    We find that satisfaction with travel is influenced by several characteristics of the trip as well as age of the child and parental safety
perception. A negative coefficient is found for age, indicating that older children are less satisfied with their trip to school. This finding
                                                  Fig. 1. Distribution of endogenous variables.
                                                                        6

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                                   Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
Table 2
Path analysis results.
                                         Parental safety perception             Satisfaction with Travel                     Mood
                                         Direct               Total             Direct               Total                   Direct            Total
  Parental safety perception                                                    0.13 **              0.13
  Satisfaction with travel                                                                                                   0.47 **           0.47
  Age                                    0.25 **              0.25                0.14 **              0.10                                      0.05
  Low income                               0.06 *               0.06                                   0.01                                    0.00
  High income                            0.07 *               0.07                                   0.01                                      0.00
  Quality bike/walk paths                0.18 **              0.18                                   0.02                                      0.01
  Street connectivity                    0.19 **              0.19                                   0.02                                      0.01
  % Low income in neighborhood             0.07 *               0.07                                   0.01                                    0.00
  Social cohesion                        0.15 **              0.15                                   0.02                                      0.01
  Distance <1 km                         0.08 **              0.08                                   0.01                                      0.01
  Distance 2–5 km                          0.08 **              0.08                                   0.01                                      0.01
  Distance >5 km                           0.14 **              0.14                                   0.02                                      0.01
  Traveled alone                                                                  0.02                 0.02                                      0.01
  Traveled with friend                                                          0.13 **              0.13                                      0.06
  Weather: sunny                                                                0.09 **              0.09                                      0.04
  Weather: very cloudy                                                            0.09 **              0.09                                      0.04
  Weather: rainy                                                                  0.04                 0.04                                      0.02
  Mode: walking                                                                 0.01                 0.01                                      0.01
  Mode: bike                                                                      0.03                 0.03                                      0.02
  Mode: other                                                                   0.08                 0.08                                      0.04
  Used favorite mode                                                            0.00                 0.00                                      0.00
  Walking * favorite mode                                                       0.10                 0.10                                      0.05
  Bike * favorite mode                                                          0.22 **              0.22                                      0.10
  Other * favorite mode                                                         0.02                 0.02
  R-squared                              0.31                                   0.10                                         0.22
  R-squared reduced form                 0.31                                   0.09                                         0.02
  Degrees of freedom                     44
  Chi-Square                             102.32
  Chi-Square/degrees of freedom          2.33
  RMSEA                                  0.044
  Goodness of Fit Index                  0.98
  Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index         0.91
is in line with Westman et al. (2017) and Friman et al. (2018) which also did not find significant influences of sex. It might be related to
lower satisfaction related to adolescence.
    The results suggest that children who traveled to school with a friend are more satisfied with their trip. Westman et al. (2017) also
found that children who engaged in social activities on the way to school would be likely to be more satisfied. The weather was also
found to be associated with travel satisfaction. When it was very cloudy, children were less satisfied with their trip and when it was
sunny they were more satisfied with their trip. Although no literature on children was found to verify this finding, it seems a plausible
finding. However, Ettema et al.’s (2017) study of adults in Sweden found that sunshine had a negative influence on two measures of
active travel satisfaction (relaxation and quality).
    Regarding the relationship between travel mode and satisfaction with travel we considered the effect of travel mode itself, whether
or not the mode used was the favorite mode, and interactions between these two. In a separate bivariate analysis of variance we found a
significant difference in satisfaction with travel for the different transport modes (F ¼ 2.73; p ¼ 0.043). The analysis indicated the
highest satisfaction with travel for children who traveled with an ‘other’ mode (mainly taxibus or public transport) (mean ¼ 3.79) and
the lowest satisfaction with travel for car trips (mean ¼ 3.60). Mean satisfaction with travel for walking and cycling are 3.75 and 3.76
respectively. Several other studies have found that active travel is related to higher satisfaction with travel by children (Ramanathan
et al., 2014; Waygood et al., 2017b; Westman et al., 2017; Stark et al., 2018). The high satisfaction with travel for other modes might be
related to the socializing opportunities in a taxibus or public transport (Jones et al., 2012; Westman et al., 2017). A t-test indicated a
significant difference (t ¼ 4.44; p ¼ 0.000) in satisfaction with travel between children who used their favorite mode that day and
children who did not. As expected, children who used their favorite mode were more satisfied with their trip (mean ¼ 3.83) than
children who did not use their favorite mode (mean ¼ 3.63). In the path analysis however, the main effects of transport mode and using
favorite mode become insignificant when we add the interaction effects of mode*favorite mode used. The results then indicate that
children are more satisfied with their trip if they travel by bike and the bike is also their favorite mode.
    Although previous studies on travel satisfaction for adults finds that active modes (e.g., Ettema et al., 2017), and in particular
bicycling (e.g., De Vos et al., 2016; St-Louis et al., 2014; Ye and Titheridge, 2017; Zhu and Fan, 2018), are often the most positive, no
significant direct result was found in our study. This may be in line with other travel satisfaction research on children examining travel
in general (Waygood et al., 2019), though Westman et al. (2017) found that public transport and active travel modes were all rated to
have better quality than travel by car for trips to school, with Friman et al. (2018) also finding that active modes to school were rated
more positively.
                                                                      7

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                                 Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
                                          Fig. 2. Path analysis results – standardized direct effects.
    Finally, we find that parental safety perception has a significant positive effect on satisfaction with travel. This indicates that
parents who worry less about the safety situation have children who are more satisfied about their trip. This relationship has not been
investigated in previous studies, though the relationship with the likelihood of active school travel has been investigated (e.g. Ikeda
et al., 2019). There are some possible explanations for this relationship. Firstly, it could be that parental safety is a mediating variable
between active travel participation and satisfaction with travel, i.e. parents that are less concerned let their children travel actively,
which the children enjoy. Another possibility is that the route is simply safer, which allows the children to enjoy their trip.
    Parental safety perception is affected by the child’s age, income, travel distance, quality of infrastructure, and social cohesion. As
children age, the parents generally have a more positive perception of the safety. This is a plausible finding because older children are
generally better at paying attention to complicated traffic situations. No specific results have been found in the literature review for
this association, but several researchers found that children generally were granted more independence by their parents when they
were older (Hillman et al., 1990; Carver et al., 2013; Curtis et al., 2015; Shaw et al., 2015), which is an indication of positive safety
perceptions.
    We find that parents with a low income have stronger safety concerns compared to parents with a high income. This may be linked
to problems such as environmental injustice where poorer households who walk more often live in areas with higher traffic danger (e.
g. Pabayo et al., 2012). Also the percentage of low income households in the neighborhood has a negative effect on parental safety
perception.
    Furthermore, parental safety perception significantly decreases (i.e. they perceive it more dangerous) with an increase in the
distance to school. The association of distance with parental safety perceptions was not found in the literature review. However, Curtis
et al. (2015) did find distance to influence whether or not children were allowed to travel independently. This might be an indirect
effect of parental safety perception. Panter et al. (2010) found that distance moderated attitudes related to cycling in children as well.
    Better connectivity between the home and school, and thus likely having more possible routes to take to school, is associated with a
more positive parental safety perception. This could be because having more routes to choose from makes it possible to choose a safe
route the child can take to school. Also when parents perceive bicycle and walking paths to be better, they are significantly more
                                                                       8

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                               Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
positive about the safety. This may be because the perception of bicycle and walking paths can be influenced by traffic safety, which is
likely to influence parental safety perception. Related, Kerr et al. (2006) also found a positive association between parental concerns
and the quality of walking paths.
    When the parents’ perception of social cohesion is higher, they are also more positive about the safety. This is in line with argu­
ments put forward by Waygood et al. (2017a) that having connections in the neighborhood decreases parental concern. Previous
research has examined perceptions of social safety (e.g. Alparone and Pacilli, 2012), but the influence of social cohesion is less well
studied. In a recent study, Ikeda et al. (2019) found that the neighborhood social environment (a composite of neighborhood con­
nections, cohesion, and safety) was positively associated with active travel to school. Aarts et al. (2013) did find it increased outdoor
play in children, which may be linked to active travel as well. Johansson (2006) found that a good sense of community increased
positive attitudes towards children’s independent mobility.
    The association between satisfaction with travel and parental safety perception also results in several indirect effects on satisfaction
with travel, through the mediation of parental safety perception.
5. Conclusions and discussion
    The aim of this study was to analyze the factors influencing satisfaction with travel and mood among Dutch children attending
primary school and the mediating role of parental safety perception. For this study survey data were collected in the Netherlands from
660 children (7–12 years) and their parents. The data were analyzed using a path analysis.
    The results indicate that parental safety perceptions are related to the age of the child, income, perceptions of neighborhood
infrastructure and social cohesion. This is in line with recent studies such as Ikeda et al. (2019) who also found that age and perceptions
of neighborhood infrastructure played a role. In this study, we demonstrated that satisfaction with school travel is higher when
parental safety perception is higher. This association results in several indirect effects of the social and physical environment on
satisfaction with travel, through the mediation of parental safety perception.
    For the influences on parental safety, several explanations can be offered. As a child’s age increases, they increase their experience
with traffic conditions, their height increases making them both more visible and more able to see over vehicles. Income levels, both
individual and neighborhood, may be related to neighborhood quality and traffic levels (Pabayo et al., 2012). Higher quality bicycle
and walking infrastructure likely relate to greater safety given through such infrastructure. Greater connectivity gives children more
options for routes, allowing them to avoid dangerous routes. Social cohesion relates to trust and has been previously found to increase
active travel to school (McDonald et al., 2010). Finally, distance will influence exposure time to the dangers of traffic. Future studies
could also look to examine the influence of weather on parental safety perception. In this study, the exact day that the parents
completed the survey is not known, as such it could not be included as an explanatory variable.
    Satisfaction with travel was found to be influenced by a number of measures. Parental safety increased satisfaction, which may be
related to levels of stress. Age was negatively associated, which may be related to adolescence, though this is not clear. Travel with
friends allows for increased socializing which children desire (Waygood et al., 2017b; Waygood, 2019) and social activities during
travel were previously found to increase satisfaction (Westman et al., 2017). Satisfaction with school travel is also higher when it is
sunny, which in areas where it is often cloudy is likely a welcome sight. Finally, although no mode had a direct effect on satisfaction,
the combination of traveling by bike if it was the child’s preferred mode increased satisfaction. The positive influence of bicycle on
satisfaction was previously found, but this is the first study to account for preference.
    This research is also the first to demonstrate that satisfaction with travel was found to have a positive effect on children’s mood. No
other influences were found, though in previous research on children’s travel and mood, Westman et al. (2017) demonstrated a
negative relationship between grade and mood as well as longer trips and mood.
    These insights can be used by policy makers to create safe school environments stimulating active travel, which in turn will improve
satisfaction with travel, well-being and health among primary school-going children. Studies (e.g. Ikeda et al., 2019) which examined
many similar points with respect to active school travel found similar results. Along with results that demonstrate a link between travel
satisfaction and life satisfaction in children (Friman et al., 2018; Waygood et al., 2018) this suggests that facilitating active school
travel leads to more satisfied and happier children. Important aspects to focus on when aiming to increase active travel rates and
psychological well-being among children include the parental safety perception, distance to school, social cohesion in neighborhoods,
connectivity and the quality of cycling and walking paths.
    High quality walking and cycling infrastructure is very important to promote active travel, parental safety perception and chil­
dren’s well-being. It is also important to keep distances to schools limited by retaining (small) schools in local communities. In addition
to built environment interventions, the promotion of active travel by informing parents and children of the benefits could be also
effective.
    This study has some limitations. Mood was measured after the trip, so it is not possible to know whether how much of the mood was
influenced by mood prior to the trip. As mentioned, Ettema et al. (2017) found that mood prior to the trip affected mood after the trip,
though they did not test whether the satisfaction with the trip affected mood. Other work has controlled for moods at different points of
the day (i.e., just before the trip (Morris and Guerra, 2015)), or in comparison to mood at home (Lanc<U+FFFD>     ee et al., 2017), but their role on
trip satisfaction was not studied. Further, mood is likely affected by the destination, thus a study that examines mood over a variety of
destination types could help establish the destination’s role on mood. In addition, while an established tool to measure satisfaction
with travel was used (e.g., Friman et al., 2018), this scale only captures momentary satisfaction (with their trip that morning) and not
long-term satisfaction or general satisfaction (e.g., Waygood et al., 2019) which has been highlighted recently as a point for future
study (Westman et al., 2019). Children’s momentary satisfaction might fluctuate more that adults’ satisfaction, making it more
                                                                       9

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                                                      Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
difficult to capture. More research into the measurement of momentary and long-term satisfaction with travel among children is
therefore desired. This study used many subjective characteristics of the environment, such as parental safety perception, perceived
social cohesion, and perceived quality of bicycle and walking paths. In future research it might be interesting to add more objectively
measured characteristics of the built environment. In addition, data collection would ideally be spread over different seasons, while for
this study all data were collected in fall. Finally, there are additional considerations that may influence children’s satisfaction with
their travel that were not captured from the parent’s such as their support of different modes. Despite these limitations, this study adds
new empirical evidence on children’s school travel and well-being in the Dutch context.
Financial disclosure
    Financial disclosure for the submission of the manuscript “Factors affecting parental safety perception, satisfaction with school
travel and mood in primary school children in the Netherlands” to the special issue on Travel, health & well-being, to be published in
Journal of Transport and Health.
    The Authors did not receive any specific funding for this work.
Funding
    This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
    Pauline van den Berg: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft. E. Owen D. Waygood: Conceptualization,
Writing - review & editing. Iris van de Craats: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. Astrid Kemperman: Conceptualization,
Writing - review & editing.
References
Aarts, M.-J., Mathijssen, J.J.P., van Oers, J.A.M., Schuit, A.J., 2013. Associations between environmental characteristics and active commuting to school among
    children: a cross-sectional study. Int. J. Behav. Med. 20 (4), 538–555.
Alparone, F.R., Pacilli, M.G., 2012. On children’s independent mobility: the interplay of demographic, environmental, and psychosocial factors. Child Geogr. 10 (1),
    109–122.
Bergstad, C.J., Gamble, A., G€ arling, T., Hagman, O., Polk, M., Ettema, D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., 2011. Subjective well-being related to satisfaction with daily travel.
    Transportation 38, 1–15.
Bronfenbrenner, U., 1979. The Ecology of Human Develpment. Experiments by Nature and Design. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts and London.
Buliung, R., Faulkner, G., Beesley, T., Kennedy, J., 2011. School travel planning: mobilizing school and community resources to encourage active school
    transportation. J. Sch. Health 81 (11), 704–712.
Carver, A., Watson, B., Shaw, B., Hillman, M., 2013. A comparison study of children’s independent mobility in England and Australia. Child Geogr. 11 (4), 461–475.
Cervesato, A., Waygood, E.O.D., 2019. Children’s independent trips on weekdays and weekends: case study of Qu<U+FFFD>ebec city. Transport. Res. Rec. 2673 (4), 907–916.
Curtis, C., Babb, C., Olaru, D., 2015. Built environment and children’s travel to school. Transport Pol. 42, 21–33.
Delbosc, A., 2012. The role of well-being in transport policy. Transport Pol. 23, 25–33.
De Vos, J., Schwanen, T., Van Acker, V., Witlox, F., 2013. Travel and subjective well-being: a focus on findings, methods and future research needs. Transport Rev. 33
    (4), 421–442.
De Vos, J., Mokhtarian, P.L., Schwanen, T., Van Acker, V., Witlox, F., 2016. Travel mode choice and travel satisfaction: bridging the gap between decision utility and
    experienced utility. Transportation 43 (5), 771–796.
Ettema, D., G€ arling, T., Olsson, L.E., Friman, M., 2010. Out-of-home activities, daily travel, and subjective well-being. Transport. Res. A 44 (9), 723–732.
Ettema, D., G€ arling, T., Eriksson, L., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., Fujii, S., 2011. Satisfaction with travel and subjective well-being: development and test of a
    measurement tool. Transport. Res. F 14 (3), 167–175.
Diener, E., 2000. Subjective well-being: the science of happiness and a proposal for a national index. Am. Psychol. 55 (1), 34–43.
Ettema, D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., G€   arling, T., 2017. Season and weather effects on travel-related mood and travel satisfaction. Front. Psychol. 8 (140), 1–9.
Friman, M., G€ arling, T., Ettema, D., Olsson, L.E., 2017. How does travel affect emotional well-being and life satisfaction? Transport. Res. A 106, 170–180.
Friman, M., Westman, J., Olsson, L.E., 2018. Children’s life satisfaction and satisfaction with school travel. Child Indic. Res. 12 (4), 1319–1332.
Golob, T., 2001. Structural Equation Modeling for travel behavior research. Transport. Res. B. 37, 1–25.
Hillman, M., Adams, J., Whitelegg, J., 1990. One False Move… A Study of Children’s Independent Mobility. Policy Studies Institute, London.
Hillman, C.H., Pontifex, M.B., Raine, L.B., Castelli, D.M., Hall, E.E., Kramer, A.F., 2009. The effect of acute treadmill walking on cognitive control and academic
    achievement in preadolescent children. Neuroscience 159 (3), 1044–1054.
Huebner, E.S., Diener, C., 2008. Research on life satisfaction of children and youth. In: The Science of Subjective Well-Being, pp. 376–392.
Ikeda, E., Hinckson, E., Witten, K., Smith, M., 2019. Assessment of direct and indirect associations between children active school travel and environmental,
    household and child factors using structural equation modelling. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Activ. 16 (1), 32.
Johansson, M., 2006. Environment and parental factors as determinants of mode for children’s leisure travel. J. Environ. Psychol. 26, 156–169.
Jones, A., Steinbach, R., Roberts, H., Goodman, A., Green, J., 2012. Re-thinking passive transport: bus fare exemptions and young people’s wellbeing. Health Place 18
    (3), 605–612.
 oreskog, K., S€
J€              orbom, D., 2001. LISREL 8.5 Scientific Software International.
Kemperman, A., Timmermans, H., 2014. Environmental correlates of active travel behavior of children. Environ. Behav. 46 (5), 583–608.
Kerr, J., Rosenberg, D., Sallis, J.F., Saelens, B.E., Frank, L.D., Conway, T.L., 2006. Active commuting to school: associations with environment and parental concerns.
    Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 38 (4), 787–794.
Lanc<U+FFFD>ee, S., Veenhoven, R., Burger, M., 2017. Mood during commute in The Netherlands: what way of travel feels best for what kind of people? Transport. Res. Pol.
    Pract. 104, 195–208.
McDonald, N.C., Deakin, E., Aalborg, A.E., 2010. Influence of the social environment on children’s school travel. Prev. Med. 50, S65–S68.
McMillan, T.E., 2007. The relative influence of urban form on a child’s travel mode to school. Transport. Res. A 41 (1), 69–79.
Mitra, R., 2013. Independent mobility and mode choice for school transportation: a review and framework for future research. Transport Rev. 33 (1), 21–43.
Morris, E.A., Guerra, E., 2015. Mood and mode: does how we travel affect how we feel? Transportation 42 (1), 25–43.
                                                                                       10

P. van den Berg et al.                                                                                                       Journal of Transport & Health 16 (2020) 100837
Nordbakke, A., Schwanen, T., 2014. Well-being and mobility: a theoretical framework and literature review focusing on older people. Mobilities 9 (1), 104–129.
Panter, J.R., Jones, A.P., Van Sluijs, E.M.F., Griffin, S.J., 2010. Attitudes, social support and environmental perceptions as predictors of active commuting behaviour in
    school children. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 64 (1), 41–48.
Pabayo, R.A., Gauvin, L., Barnett, T.A., Morency, P., Niki<U+FFFD>    ema, B., S<U+FFFD>eguin, L., 2012. Understanding the determinants of active transportation to school among children:
    evidence of environmental injustice from the Quebec longitudinal study of child development. Health Place 18 (2), 163–171.
Pollard, E.L., Lee, P.D., 2003. Child well-being: a systematic review of the literature. Soc. Indicat. Res. 61 (1), 59–78.
Ramanathan, S., O’Brien, C., Faulkner, G., Stone, M., 2014. Happiness in motion: emotions, well- being, and active school travel. J. Sch. Health 84 (8), 516–523.
Shaw, B., Bicket, M., Elliott, B., 2015. Children’s Independent Mobility: an International Comparison and Recommendations for Action. Policy Studies Institute,
    London.
Sirard, J.R., Slater, M.E., 2008. Walking and bicycling to school: a review. Am. J. Lifestyle Med. Sep. 2 (5), 372–396.
Stark, J., Meschik, M., Singleton, P.A., Schützhofer, B., 2018. Active school travel, attitudes and psychological well-being of children. Transport. Res. F 56, 453–465.
St-Louis, E., Manaugh, K., van Lierop, D., El-Geneidy, A., 2014. The happy commuter: a comparison of commuter satisfaction across modes. Transport. Res. Part F 26,
    160–170.
Van de Craats, I., 2019. Healthy School Environments. Analysis of the Factors Influencing the Travel Mode to School of Dutch Primary School Children and its Relation
    with Parental Safety Perception and Children’s Well-Being and Health. Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven. https://research.tue.nl/nl/
    studentTheses/healthy-school-environments.
van de Craats, I., van den Berg, P., Kemperman, A., Waygood, E.O.D., 2019. Children’s school travel and wellbeing in The Netherlands. In: Waygood, E.O.D.,
    Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., Mitra, R. (Eds.), Transportation and Children’s Well-Being. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 317–338.
Van den Berg, P., Kemperman, A., Waygood, O.E.D., 2019. Editorial for the special issue on travel and well-being. Travel Behav. Soc. 16, 182–184.
van Goeverden, de Boer, E., 2013. School travel behaviour in the Netherlands and Flanders. Transport Pol. 26, 73–84.
Veitch, J., Carver, A., Salmon, J., Abbott, G., Ball, K., Crawford, D., Cleland, V., Timperio, A., 2017. What predicts children’s active transport and independent
    mobility in disadvantaged neighborhoods? Health Place 44, 103–109.
Washington, S., Karlaftis, M., Mannering, F., 2003. Statistical and Econometric Methods for Transportation Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall, Washington D.C.
Waygood, E.O.D., 2019. Transport and social wellbeing. In: Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., Mitra, R. (Eds.), Transportation and Children’s Well-Being.
    Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 61–80.
Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., Taniguchi, A., 2017a. Children’s incidental social interaction during travel international case studies from Canada, Japan,
    and Sweden. J. Transport Geogr. 63, 22–29.
Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., Taniguchi, A., 2017b. Transport and child well-being: an integrative review. Travel Behav. Soc. 9, 32–49.
Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Taniguchi, A., Olsson, L.E., 2018. Children’s life satisfaction and travel satisfaction: evidence from Canada, Japan, and Sweden. Travel
    Behaviour and Society.
Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Taniguchi, A., Olsson, L.E., 2019. Children’s life satisfaction and travel satisfaction: evidence from Canada, Japan, and Sweden. Travel
    Behav. Soc. 16, 214–223.
Waygood, E.O.D., Kitamura, R., 2009. Children in a rail-based developed area of Japan travel patterns, independence, and exercise. Transport. Res. Rec. 2125, 36–43.
Waygood, E.O.D., Manaugh, K., 2019. Individual and household influences. In: Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., Mitra, R. (Eds.), Transportation and
    Children’s Well-Being. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 253–272.
Westman, J., Johansson, M., Olsson, L.E., Mårtensson, F., Friman, M., 2013. Children’s affective experience of every-day travel. J. Transport Geogr. 29, 95–102.
Westman, J., Olsson, L.E., G€ arling, T., Friman, M., 2017. Children’s travel to school: satisfaction, current mood, and cognitive performance. Transportation 44 (6),
    1365–1382.
Westman, J., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E., 2019. Travel and child wellbeing: the psychological and cognitive domains. In: Waygood, E.O.D., Friman, M., Olsson, L.E.,
    Mitra, R. (Eds.), Transportation and Children’s Well-Being. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 41–60.
Ye, R., Titheridge, H., 2017. Satisfaction with the commute: the role of travel mode choice, built environment and attitudes. Transport. Res. Part D 52B, 535–547.
Zhu, J., Fan, Y., 2018. Daily travel behavior and emotional well-being: effects of trip mode, duration, purpose, and companionship. Transport. Res. Part A 118,
    360–373.
                                                                                         11

