

Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94



Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Travel Behaviour and Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tbs




Children’s active travel, local activity spaces and wellbeing: A case study
in Perth, WA
Courtney Babb a,<U+21D1>, Doina Olaru b, Carey Curtis a, Dave Robertson a
a
Department of Planning and Geography, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia
b
UWA Business School, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia



a r t i c l e           i n f o                           a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                          Children’s neighborhood spaces have the potential to enhance their wellbeing by affording active and
Received 15 August 2016                                   independent travel. Drawing on a case study of 49 children aged between 9 and 13, living in a suburb
Received in revised form 27 April 2017                    of Perth, Western Australia, this study adopts a capability approach to understand how children’s travel
Accepted 6 June 2017
in the neighborhood environment supports their wellbeing. A mixed methods approach is used to explore
Available online 20 June 2017
children’s activity spaces: 1) GPS tracks; 2) children’s activity diaries; 3) surveys; and 4) children’s photo
pictorial collages. Activity spaces and affordances are used to inform the capability framework. We com-
Keywords:
pare the realized local activity spaces (as confidence ellipses) to the potential activity spaces, indicative
Children’s active travel
Independent mobility
the children’s potential to achieve wellbeing, and draw on children’s photographic and pictorial evalua-
Capability approach                                       tions of their neighborhood to provide a qualitative perspective on the range of affordances. The results
Activity spaces                                           show substantial constraints to the children’s active travel and independent mobility, contrasting with
Affordances                                               the positive view of the neighborhood the children hold. Children were mainly chauffeured at short dis-
tances that could have easily been walked or cycled, yet the photo-collage reveals a rich diversity of
places and activities children access and desire to reach and use. The capability framework offers insight
into some of the factors limiting children’s travel, but also highlights the agency children have in shaping
their own travel behavior.
Ó 2017 Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction: children’s travel in urban environments                                     children independence. Being independently mobile has been
linked with higher rates of physical activity in children (Mackett
Pioneering studies on children’s urban and rural lives by geog-                          et al., 2007; Wen et al., 2009) and the development of cognitive
raphy and planning scholars in the late twentieth century, such                              skills through providing opportunities to develop spatial aware-
as Lynch and Banerjee (1977), Ward (1978), and Hillman et al.                                ness (Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002), as well as increased resilience
(1990) have led to the increased recognition of the place-based                              and strategies to deal with risk (Malone, 2007). Safety and security
effects on the wellbeing of children. The local environment can                              represent main concerns for parents, leading them to restrict inde-
afford children space for active travel (walking and cycling), and                           pendent mobility of their children (Garrad, 2009; Jago et al., 2009;
consequently the means to achieve various types of wellbeing ben-                            Ergler et al., 2013; Foster et al., 2014). As an alternative to limiting
efits. Active travel enables children to access places important for                         mobility, the accompaniment of children (with siblings, parents, or
their development and social connectedness such as schools, parks,                           friends) becomes a means to make a safer, secure environment
libraries, shops and recreation centers (Freeman and Tranter, 2010;                          enabling active travel (Faulkner et al., 2015).
Loebach and Gilliland, 2016a). Children who walk or cycle to                                     There has been an observed decline in children’s independent
school engage in routine physical activity and are also more likely                          mobility and active travel in developed countries (Faulkner et al.,
to engage in other types of moderate to vigorous activity within                             2015; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016b). This is also the case in Aus-
school environments and extracurricular activities that support                              tralia, where the rates of children’s active and independent travel
their physical health (Mackett et al., 2005). Importantly, walking                           to school has decreased since the 1990s from 61% to 32% in 2012
and cycling, unlike the car, are modes of travel that children can                           (Schoeppe et al., 2015); this is despite growing evidence that local
undertake without adult accompaniment, and therefore also afford                             environments provide many opportunities for enhancing children’s
wellbeing. Children are now more dependent on their parents than
<U+21D1> Corresponding author.                                                                  previous generations, and are now labelled as the ‘‘bubble
E-mail address: C.Babb@curtin.edu.au (C. Babb).                                        wrapped”, ‘‘back seat”, and ‘‘battery reared” generations, compared

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2017.06.002
2214-367X/Ó 2017 Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.































/


of









































82                                               C. Babb et al. / Travel


to the ‘‘free range” previous generations (Malone, 2007; Loebach
and Gilliland, 2016a). The potential reasons for the decline are
numerous, with research identifying influential factors such as
the increased distances between schools and households

(Gleeson and Sipe, 2006; Malone, 2007; Schoeppe et al., 2015
Curtis et al., 2015); increased household incomes and car owner-

ship and use (Timperio et al., 2004; Malone, 2007; Van der Ploeg,
et al. 2008; Woolcock et al., 2010); more traffic on the roads lead-

ing to increased real and perceived risk of pedestrian injuries

(Timperio et al., 2004); and the overall perceived convenience of

car travel compared to walking and cycling (Lang et al., 2011).

The modern lifestyle children lead is also increasingly character-

ized by a range of extracurricular activities (Barker, 2011), thus

necessitating increased mobility in urban settings.

Any inquiry into the relationship between children’s active and

independent travel and their wellbeing is required to address a

range of individual, social and cultural factors. The World Health

Organization (WHO, 1948) defines health as ‘‘a state of complete

physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence

of disease or infirmity”. Multiple sources of data are therefore nec-

essary to provide insight into this multi-faceted concept of wellbe-

ing, which encompasses social and household relations, individual

factors, and the built environment. Complex, multifaceted prob-

lems call for different methodologies to triangulate, validate, inte-

grate information and provide complementing views of the

researched phenomena, consequently enabling deeper under-

standing of the key factors. A mixed methods approach has been

used to understand children’s health and social capital (Baum

et al., 2009); independent mobility (O’Brien et al., 2000) and every-

day mobility (Christensen et al., 2011); development of a sense of

place (Lim and Barton, 2010); and experience of local environ-

ments (Mitchell et al., 2007). Researchers have responded in differ-

ent ways, some for example drawing upon interviews with

children (Ergler et al., 2013; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016b),

whereas others have utilized visual methods and photography to

situate children within the contexts they are evaluating (Mitchell

et al., 2007).

This study investigates the links between children’s travel in

their local neighborhood and wellbeing, using a case study of a

middle-class suburban neighborhood, centered on a primary

school in Perth, Western Australia. Two concepts, activity spaces

and affordances, are incorporated within a capabilities framework

(Sen, 1993). A mixed-methods research design is applied for inves-

tigation. The combination of methods includes: multivariate data

analysis of children’s travel behavior; spatial analysis and visual-

ization of realized and potential activity spaces; and a content

analysis of photographs taken by children during their daily activ-

ities, reflective of the quality of their local activity spaces. The

methods used provide insight into the range, mode and volume

of travel and children’s reflection on their local neighborhoods.

The paper provides a ‘proof-of-concept’ for how to combine rich

sources of data in examining children’s affordances and capabili-

ties/functionings as ways of measuring wellbeing in relation to tra-

vel and activity spaces. In doing so, the research informs future

studies utilizing mixed method research design to achieve a better

understanding of how children’s wellbeing is shaped by their local

travel activity spaces.

The structure of the paper is the following: Section 2 reviews

the relevant literature on the capability approach with a focus on

children’s active travel, then discusses the potential for activity

spaces and affordances to capture travel behavior relevant to chil-
dren’s wellbeing within the local urban environment. Section 3
describes the case study and sources of data, while Section 4 pre-
sents the methods of analysis used for investigation. Results of
the analysis (multivariate statistics, visualization of activity spaces,

Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


and photo collage analysis) are given in Section 5 and discussed in
Section 6.


2. Background


2.1. Children’s wellbeing and the capability approach


There is now a well-developed body of literature linking routine

travel behavior and people’s wellbeing. Individuals’ subjective

wellbeing, through happiness or feelings of wellbeing, has been

linked to travel or mobility via the experience of travelling and

the activities undertaken whilst travelling, access to activities that

travel affords, and wellbeing associated with the potential for tra-

vel, even if not realized (Reardon and Abdallah, 2013; de Vos et al.,

2013). However, a critique of subjective wellbeing is that individ-

uals may adapt their preferences and mental states to sub-

optimal living conditions and therefore not be fully aware of the

potential to enhance their wellbeing (Qizilbash, 2006). Others have

argued that an enriched understanding of the role of travel and

mobility on wellbeing requires going beyond subjective conceptu-

alizations of wellbeing (Nordbakke and Schwanen, 2013).

A capability approach offers a potentially rich exploration of the

relationship between children’s travel in their local neighborhood

and wellbeing. Developed by Sen (1993) and Nussbaum (2000) to

address limitations in evaluating wellbeing in the field of develop-

ment economics, the capability approach has been increasingly

used as an evaluative framework in a diverse range of disciplines

including design (Oosterlaken, 2009), urban planning (Basta,

2016), and transport planning (Beyazit, 2011). The capability

approach goes beyond evaluating wellbeing as an end state (such

as the subjective experience of being happy), and instead concep-

tualizes wellbeing as having the capability to freely select alterna-

tive combinations of various valuable functionings, which are

different ways of ‘doing’ or ‘being’ (Sen, 1993). According to the

capability approach, individuals have the freedom to reason and

select functionings, such as being healthy or being independently

mobile, from a set of all possible functionings they could achieve,

known as a capability set. These sets of capabilities are dependent

on an individual’s capacity to convert resources available within

particular social, structural and spatial contexts. Fig. 1 illustrates

the basic elements of the capability approach.

The multifaceted conceptualization of wellbeing intrinsic to the

capability approach creates a number of possibilities for under-

standing the role of local travel in shaping children’s wellbeing.

As Robeyns (2006) explains, the capability approach is delibera-

tively equivocal and relies on specifications of the evaluative

framework to be made fit-for-purpose. This means differential

weighting may be given to specific components within the frame-

work. For example, an evaluation may focus on conversion factors

over achieved functionings. For this purpose, the capabilities

approach has been used to understand the relationship between

travel behavior and wellbeing in marginalized groups including

older person’s mobility resources in Stockholm, Sweden (Ryan

et al., 2015), and has been used to inform transport related factors

relevant to minimum incomes standards in the UK (Smith et al.,

2012). Alternatively, a framework may place greater emphasis on

the choices individuals make when selecting available function-

ings. This may be relevant when an individual has a capability

set that supports health and wellbeing, but makes decisions that

do not allow them to achieve health-related functionings.


2.2. Activity spaces and affordances

To adapt a capability approach to evaluate the potential and
actualized functionings associated with children’s local settings it

C. Babb et al. / Travel




Fig. 1. Capability approach - concep



is necessary to use appropriate conceptual and methodological
apparatus to explore key components of the capability approach.
We draw upon two such tools for this purpose: activity spaces
and affordances, which are presented in detail next.

2.2.1. Activity spaces
Few tools are able to simultaneously account for space and time
in understanding daily activity and travel patterns (Hägerstrand,
1970; Kwan, 2000; Weber and Kwan, 2003). Activity spaces for
human activities integrate many dimensions that underlie spatial
behavior: the distribution and concentration of the activities, and
the intensity of using space to satisfy those activity needs, given
various institutional, budget, social and temporal constraints.
Activity spaces used in transport reflect the demand for daily activ-
ities conducted by individuals in various locations. They also indi-
cate the ability of urban and transport services to satisfy that need,
thus, they encapsulate both demand and supply. If the opportuni-
ties are plenty and lie near to home locations, travelling further to
reach desired destinations is not necessary. Conversely, the lack of
diverse services and opportunities, combined with various con-
straints, will require larger urban areas to be covered. Activity
spaces are useful not only for measuring the spatial arrangements
of travel and the use of urban space to satisfy daily activity needs,
but also for indicating the spatial awareness of the individuals
traversing the space (Newsome et al., 1998; Golledge, 2002;
Axhausen et al., 2004; Botte, 2015).
As expected, activity spaces are strongly conditioned by the key
fixed locations of the household or individual activities: home,
work, school and other frequently visited activity locations. They
were coined ‘‘pegs” of activity by Golledge and Stimson (1987),
as the schedule of daily activities depends on them, and conse-
quently, the shape, scale and inherent structure of resulting activ-
ity space geometries. However, for children, the local activity space
can contain opportunities to access ‘third places’, places other than
home and school that provide opportunities for children to navi-
gate the unfamiliar (Witten et al., 2015). Whereas most studies
looked at households and adults, there has been some derivation
of activity spaces for children and students (Christian et al.,
2015; Loebach and Gilliland, 2016a). For example, Christian et al.
(2015) measured activity space as road network distances from
home and determined the number of opportunities within 400
and 1600 m activity spaces to understand relationships between
exposure to neighborhood destinations and time in front of a tele-
vision or computer screen.
A characteristic of activity spaces that contributes to an evalua-
tion of capabilities is that a distinction can made between a poten-
tial activity space and a realized activity space (Patterson and Farber,
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94                                          83




tual framework (adapted from Robeyns, 2005).



2015). Potential activity spaces reflect conditions where activities
may be conducted locally, but for some reason the urban space is
not used or is underutilized. It can be hypothesized that a child
who has a large realized activity space has a larger capability set,
or available functionings, to choose from. A more restricted local
activity space may limit children’s quality of life if it reduces access
to activities such as play, social interaction or exploring. Fleuret
and Atkinson (2007) have highlighted the difficulty to accurately
measure potentials, which means that usually actualized capabili-
ties are measured.

2.2.2. Affordances
The second conceptual tool, the notion of affordance, has been
used widely in relation to children’s relationship with their local
environment (Heft, 1988; Chawla and Heft, 2002; Kytta, 2002;
Rudner, 2012; Yatiman et al., 2012; Ergler et al., 2013). In New
Zealand, Ergler et al. (2013) used affordances to study various con-
textual influences on children’s wellbeing through play. The con-
cept of affordances is drawn from Gibson’s (1979) theory, posing
that we perceive the environment, not in terms of its appearance
of form, but through the various functions that its form and mate-
riality affords us. A tree, for example, can have a number of affor-
dances for children including the capacity to climb, as a place to
rest, or providing some connection to nature. Kyttä (2004) theo-
rized that affordances can be ‘actualized’ or ‘potential’. Kyttä
(2004) developed a typology of potential affordance separated into
three interdependent fields: the field of promoted action, or cultur-
ally and socially appropriate affordance; the field of free action, or
the emergent and latent potential for environments to support
new affordance through adaptation and reflexivity of individuals;
and the field of constrained action, where environments settings
or features limit affordances.
In combination, activity spaces and affordances have been used
to explore children’s activities and associated wellbeing in local
environments. In Canada, Loebach and Gilliland (2016b) combined
GPS and subjective data sets to explore the size of children’s neigh-
borhood activity space and the affordances associated with inde-
pendent play. However, to our knowledge there is no research
that uses these concepts within a capability framework. By using
a capability approach, combined with the concept of affordances,
it is possible to interrogate the multiple domains where children’s
wellbeing is shaped by their local travel. Affordances potentially
offer insight into wellbeing from a capability perspective, as they
represent the functional qualities of the environment and enable
or restrict different ways of ‘doing’ or ‘being’. Furthermore, the
notion of potential affordances provides insights into conversion
factors that enhance and limit the ability of children to translate

84                                                      C. Babb et al. / Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


resources into a capability set and then allow them to freely choose
a range of functionings that define their wellbeing. Yet, an inte-
grated view of the wellbeing, making use of affordances and func-
tionings (Sen, 1993), which are assessed using objective and
subjective measures such as activity spaces and photo-collages,
has not emerged. Realized activity spaces derived from children’s
regular walking and cycling behavior provide a useful connection
to a capabilities because they indicate the spatial capacity of chil-
dren to actualize affordances within their local neighborhood
through active and independent mobility. Fig. 2 illustrates the con-
ceptual framework informing this research. We see this paper as an
important contribution to understanding new ways in which travel
affects children’s wellbeing.


3. Data collection

3.1. Case study and sample

Given the need to explore children’s perceptions and behavior
across multiple spatial and social domains – household, school,
recreation, social networks – a case study approach was used to
understand the children’s realized and potential functionings
within their walkable neighborhood activity space. A case study
approach allows a rich understanding of the social and built envi-
ronments contexts that are relevant to children’s wellbeing. The
case study was a primary school in a suburb of Perth, WA, approx-
imately 12 km from the Perth CBD, and 5 km from the coastal city
of Fremantle. Fig. 3 illustrates the regional context of the case
study.
The neighborhood surrounding the primary school has seen
gradual subdivision of lots between two major highways since                             Fig. 3. Case study location within the Perth metropolitan regional context.
the 1950s resulting in the land use being predominantly a patch-                         adapted from WAPC (2013).
work of primarily residential cells with varied road network
designs (mixed grid pattern, curvilinear, and cul-de-sac street
designs). The urban form is typical of much suburban development                         is given to students living within 1.25 km. The pattern of land use
in Australian cities developed at that time. It is primarily low den-                    and urban form is consistent over the enrolment catchment of the
sity residential housing with small suburban shopping centres.                           school. The socio-economic status of the LGA was higher than the
Some light industrial land uses are scattered amongst the residen-                       average for the Perth metropolitan area (ABS, 2012): average
tial area, with the concentration of industry increasing in close                        weekly household income of AUD$1619 compared to AUD$1459
proximity to a major highway that dissected the area to the south                        for the total metropolitan area; and 77.1% home ownership
of the school. The city has over 600 hectares of open space, dis-                        amongst the families in the study (n = 38) compared to 69.1% in
tributed across over 200 parks. According to Western Australian                          the metropolitan area.
State Government policy the school was classified as a local intake                          The recruitment of participants was conducted with consulta-
area school (WA Department of Education, 2015), meaning priority                         tion and assistance from the principal and teachers in the school.




Fig. 2. Conceptual framework integrating Activity Spaces, Affordances and Capabilities (achieved functionings). Activity spaces are defined by individual children’s
travel behavior. Source: the authors.


































Source:

















active


C. Babb et al. / Travel


Children within three school year groups (141 in total) were ver-
bally briefed and provided with written information regarding
the research project. Of these children, 49 participated. Both chil-
dren and parents completed surveys on travel patterns, indepen-
dent mobility and perceptions of the neighborhood. The

participant year groups consisted of children aged between nine

and 13 years old. This age group was selected because it repre-

sented the ages children in developed countries begin to become

independently mobile (Hillman et al., 1990), although it is impor-

tant to note there is variation across different cultural contexts

(Waygood and Susilo, 2011).


3.2. Data sources


3.2.1. Geospatial data

To establish the children’s potential and actual local activity

spaces, the 49 children were given GPS devices and asked to attach

the devices to their arms for four days: two weekdays and two

weekend days. Given the limited number of GPS devices (20), the

tracking was undertaken across three different weeks, from 31st

May to 28th June 2012 (first group – 19 children; second group –

20 children; third group – 10 children). For validation purposes,

39 of the 49 children also completed travel diaries on the days they

carried GPS. The weather on the days the children wore the GPS

devices was mild, with some short periods of light rainfall.

The GPS were set to record locations at 15-s intervals, resulting

in about half a million GPS points. In the software ArcGIS 10.2.2,

groups of GPS points representing different trips were manually

identified using a combination of information sources: Landgate

aerial photography, Open Street Map topographic maps, the chil-

dren’s travel diaries, the ‘Distance’ field recorded by the GPS, Goo-
gle Street View and the local knowledge of the researcher who
regularly cycles in the vicinity of the school.
A ‘trip’ was considered to occur when the child moved to a new
cadastral location (e.g., going from home to school), but not when
they were moving around within a location (e.g., running around
inside a park). Also, when the child had not changed her/his loca-
tion for more than two minutes, this was considered a stop
between trips. When the child was indoors, no trip was recorded.
The process was time-consuming, but assisted the research team
to obtain a high degree of accuracy and remove known technical
and administration errors. A total of 471 trips were identified.
Each group of GPS points representing a trip was given a unique
identification number and linked to a database created from the
completed travel diaries. The GPS points were also attributed with
a travel mode, using the same classification as the trip diaries
(walking, cycling, car, public transport, other). This was manually
assigned based on an interpretation of speed, route and time of
day. For validation purposes, when possible, the mode recorded
by the child in the travel diary was compared to the inferred travel
mode. Next, the points were converted to a line GIS file where each
line represents the route of a trip, and for which distance and dura-
tion calculations were made. Each line was attributed with an ori-
gin and destination, primarily to identify trips starting or ending at
‘‘home”.

3.2.2. Survey data
The 49 children and their parents also completed surveys. The
purpose of the surveys was to gain insight into individual and
household scale factors related to children’s mobility, and also
the licences that parents imposed on their children to travel inde-
pendently in their neighborhood. The licences represent an impor-
tant capability for children, giving them the freedom to expand
their potential range of available functionings. Four licences to tra-
vel, adapted from Hillman et al. (1990) were categorized: the
licence to travel to school independently; the licence to travel from
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94                                        85


school independently; the licence to cross roads alone; and the
licence to ride a bike on a main street alone. Demographic informa-
tion was also collected.


3.2.3. Photo-collage

A photo-collage method drawing on an approach used by

Castonguay and Jutras (2009) was conducted with the same group

of children who completed the survey. The intent was to capture

children’s perceptions and evaluations of achieved, potential and

constrained affordances (Kyttä, 2004) in their local neighborhood.

The children were given disposable cameras and asked to take pho-
tographs of what they liked and hated about their neighborhood.

The exercise took place a week before the first GPS data collection
in order to not influence normal daily travel activity. After the pho-

tographs were developed, the children were asked to construct

three thematic collages using their photographs, annotations and

drawings. The three themes were: ‘‘What I love about my neighbor-

hood” (actualized affordances); ‘‘What I hate about my neighbor-

hood” (constrained affordances); and ‘‘What I think my perfect

neighborhood is” (perceived, but not actualized affordances), indi-

cating elements of an ideal local neighborhood space. The annota-

tions and drawings were particularly useful for the ‘perfect

neighborhood’ collages, as they allowed children to freely imagine

a range of functionings that could be afforded in local activity

spaces. 144 photo-collages were collected; 48 each of the ‘Hate’,

‘Love’, and ‘Perfect’ collages. The photo-collage data contributed

to an understanding of the range of functionings afforded by chil-

dren’s local activity spaces, and the method provided an evaluative

space complementary to the open and reflective nature of the

capability approach to understanding wellbeing.


4. Analysis

4.1. Multivariate analysis

A combination of multivariate statistics, visualization and geo-
spatial analytics was applied to understand the role of local travel
in enhancing children’s wellbeing. Realized activity spaces (RAS)
for each child were determined using a confidence ellipse (two
standard deviations, 95%), 50 m trip buffer and convex hull in Arc-
GIS, based on all active trips that started or ended at home. The
choice of three types of activity spaces metrics responds to the lim-
itations of a single measure to represent the individual’s spatial
experiences (e.g., Axhausen et al., 2004; Rai et al., 2007; Botte,
2015), each definition emphasizing certain characteristics of the
spatial spread. Standard distances (circle buffer with the radius
equal to the standard deviation of distances from home or other
set value) entail symmetry around home, therefore tend to exacer-
bate the effect of spatial outliers; convex hulls cover the maximum
geographical extent of the data, considering all points equally
important, thus may potentially exacerbate the effect of spatial
outliers; buffers of routes (‘network bands’) tend to underestimate
the activity spaces and emphasize the travel over the fixed loca-
tions, requiring information on routes; confidence ellipses are less
sensitive to outliers, are easy to compute, and weigh the activity
space towards the most frequented locations, but they may overes-
timate the size of activity spaces.
The RAS were then compared with a potential activity space,
defined as an ellipse with the same orientation and axes’ ratio as
the RAS confidence ellipse, but with the length of the long axis rep-
resenting a 60 min walk, (30 min walk each way along the axis
from the centre of the RAS) at the average walking speed for that
child (see Table 3 below). For the two children who had no walking
trips (only cycling), the average walking speed of all children was
used. This comparison was expected to provide some indication

86                                                        C. Babb et al. / Travel Beha


on the extent to which children have the potential to use their
opportunities to be physically active in their neighborhood, given
the restrictions applied by their parents. Our hypothesis is that
enriched spatial experiences of children (larger RAS) correspond
to greater perceived and actualized affordances, with positive
effects on wellbeing, whereas smaller RAS compared to potential
activity spaces are indicative of constrained actions/affordances.

4.2. Content analysis photo-collages

A thematic coding of the content of children’s photo-collages
was conducted using Hyperresearch, a qualitative analytic soft-
ware tool. Affordances were identified in the photo-collages using
an analytic framework drawing on literature on behavior settings
(Heft, 1988). Four categories were used to guide the coding of
images and accompanying text: the activities featured in the
images or texts; the objects prominently framed in the image,
and sometimes drawn next to photographs; the emotions, atti-
tudes or affect noted in any text; and the place or setting where
the photograph was taken, and/or taken from. A frequency analysis
of codes was conducted across each of the four categories. Then, a
qualitative analysis of the main themes identified actualized, con-
strained and perceived affordances captured by the collages. Affor-
dances indicated the functionings available to children in their
local environments. Following a capability approach, positive func-
tionings identified in the photocollages, either realized or latent,
were assumed to be associated with positive states of wellbeing.
Cross-analysis of affordances and gender, age, level of independent
mobility, and extent of RAS, provided insight into the factors that
constrained the children’s active travel behavior and hence poten-
tially their wellbeing.


5. Results

5.1. Descriptive statistics

The sample included 18 boys and 31 girls, mostly 10 years old
or over (Table 1). Cross-tabulations of age and responses to the four
licences (travel TO school; travel FROM school; licence to cross
main roads; and licence to ride a bike on main roads) indicated that
12 children did not have any independent mobility (parents
answered ‘no’ to all licence questions), while nine children were
independently mobile, and the remaining had some constraints.
No significant differences were noticed in licences granted to girls
and boys (p  0.05). Given the small sample size, care has been
taken to avoid generalizations based on the analysis.
Statistics of children’s daily travel are provided in Table 2 and of
their individual walking trips in Table 3. Table 2 shows that a third
of the sample did not report any active travel and that boys and
girls did not differ significantly (p  0.05) in the overall average
duration and distance of their daily GPS recorded trips.1 On aver-
age, the children made 27% of their trips by active modes of trans-
port. Active travel represents only 2.2% of the total distance, but
15% of the daily travel time of the children. Weather conditions
did not have any significant (p  0.05) impact on the children’s
active travel.
The results indicate a variation, and whereas girls record longer
total distances and times by all travel modes, boys engaged in
more active travel on average and travelled for longer distances
by walking or cycling. This was also found by previous research

1

The GPS recorded data is underestimating daily travel, due to a number of reasons
(technical issues, non-compliance, etc.). However, with the data available, the exact

bias cannot be assessed. Only 188 out of 471 trips in the GPS data had matches in the
travel diaries.
viour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


and is attributed to the higher independent mobility levels boys
enjoy compared to girls (Schoeppe et al., 2015). Only two children
achieved 60 min of physical activity from travel, so the majority
failed to meet the WHO recommendation of daily physical activity
for children (WHO, 2010) by means of travel (Strong et al., 2005).
This is primarily because most of the GPS-recorded daily trips were
by car, even at distances where walking and cycling are feasible.
Furthermore, 63% of the car trips were at distances under 3 km,
one in three trips under 1.5 km, and one in six trips under 1 km.
Comparable results were found in Canada by Morency and
Demers (2010), where 33% of children trips under 1 km were
motorized.
The dominance of car-based travel is shown in Fig. 4.
In terms of walking, children travelled at distances up to 3 km,
with an average of 432 m and 7 min per trip (Table 3). On average,
boys were likely to walk and cycle longer distances (about 1 km
more per day or 0.5 km more per walking trip) and for more time
(10 min more per day or 4 more min per trip). This average value is
about half of the distance from home to the outer boundary of a
child’s local activity space reported by Loebach and Gilliland
(2016a) in London, Canada, which is 980 m. No significant differ-
ences were noted in relation to age.
Most of the walking trips occurred during the weekend (57%).
Whereas walking to school only accounted for 15% of trips, return-
ing home accounted for 29% of walking trips. Outdoor activities
was the second highest purpose for walking trips (25%) as shown
in Fig. 5.
Given the small number of children in this dataset, tests com-
paring active travel behavior per day and child are not possible.
Instead, the comparison of the individual trips (Table 4) confirms
boys appear more active, walking longer than girls and at higher
speeds. This concurs with Klinker et al. (2014).

5.2. Local activity spaces (realized and potential)

As indicated in Section 4, the analysis was conducted in two
steps: 1) derivation of local activity spaces based on the GPS-
identified trips; and 2) potential activity spaces. Various metrics
were tested: convex hulls, buffers, and confidence ellipses (CE).
Their analysis highlighted the benefits of CE, by providing not only
the extent of the area used by children in their daily travel, but also
the direction/orientation of their mobility.
Fig. 6 presents the variability of buffer area, convex hull and 95%
CE for the realized activity spaces as a function of the maximum
distance from home. As expected, the measures covary substan-
tially, yet the CE is larger and displays non-linearities not captured
by the buffers approach.
The charts clearly display a clustering of points for distances
under 500 m, confirming that with very few exceptions, children
in this study did not walk or cycle outside of their immediate local
environment. As indicated, this is lower than the average distances
presented in Loebach and Gilliland (2016a) for children’s travel in
Canada.
Fig. 7 presents the areas of realized and potential local activity
spaces for the 23 children who had active trips starting or finishing
at home. The ratio between the realized and potential area is an
indicator of potential active mobility, which shows that none of
the children reached or exceeded the area that can be covered in
30 min by walking, with 17 children displaying ratios under 20%.
Consistent with previous findings, boys have potential activity
spaces twice as large as the girls (hence substantially larger capa-
bility sets) and are more likely to reach their potential activity

space (44%), compared to the girls (12%). Age has not contributed


in any significant or systematic way to the relative size of the activ-
ity spaces, nor parent restrictions, suggesting that although many
of the children have the freedom to walk in their neighborhood

C. Babb et al. / Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


Table 1
Sample description.

Gender                                 Total               No Licences                Some licences             All four licences
Boys               Girls
Age                   9–10                   10                 17                  27                  11                         10                        3
11                     5                  11                  16                  1                          10                        4
12–13                  3                  3                   6                   0                          3                         2
Total                                        18                 31                  49                  12                         23                        9

Note: The total number of responses for licences is 44, because five parents did not answer the question.



Table 2
Total travel per day.

Total travel                                                           p           Active travel                                                    p
Girls (n = 31)                    Boys (n = 18)                                    Girls (n = 20)                  Boys (n = 12)
Mean           Std. Deviation     Mean            Std. Deviation                   Mean         Std. Deviation     Mean       Std. Deviation
Minutes               41.09          52.33              30.10           26.29                0.411       13.96        18.48              14.73      13.36                 0.901
Distance (km)         22.91          59.25              14.17           25.14                0.556       0.81         0.73               1.38       1.40                  0.134

Note: Only eight children reported cycling, with a total number of 16 trips.



Table 3
Walking trips distances and durations.

Variable                                      Minimum                                    Maximum                               Mean                              Std. Deviation
Minutes                                       0.5                                        32.75                                 6.69                              5.67
Distance (m)                                  18                                         2908                                  431.82                            454.78
Speed (km/h)                                  1.27                                       6.17                                  3.69                              1.05

Note: Short walking trips correspond to movements from activities co-located spatially (e.g., shopping strips, plazas).




Fig. 4. Maps of non-active trips (left) vs active (right) in the vicinity of the school. The land-use is based on Australian Bureau of Statistics ‘meshblocks’ (2011).



independently they chose not to. Only nine unaccompanied trips                                     accompanied. The total number of active trips (walking and
identified in all the GPS data (six walking and three cycling), but                                cycling) that were in the GPS data and had accompaniment infor-
accompaniment was only known when the trip had a match in                                          mation from the travel diaries was 34. We estimate that only about
the travel diary data and the travel diary indicated trips were                                    a quarter of active trips were unaccompanied.
87



















































88                                                       C. Babb et al.

















Fig. 5. Walking trips by purpose.


5.3. Photo-collages

The photo-collages were analyzed according to the categories
outlined in Section 4.2. Table 5 illustrates a summary of the rela-
tive frequency of codes occurring in each of the three collages from


Table 4
Walking trips distances and durations by gender.

Male (n = 44)
Mean                   Std. Deviation
Distance (m)               894                    790
Minutes                    9.90                   7.78
Speed (km/h)               4.25                   1.27




Fig. 6. 50 m Buffer area, Convex
/ Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


all children. Further disaggregated analysis comparing frequency
of codes was conducted between children with different levels of
independent mobility, gender, age, and high and low realized
activity spaces of 30 min walk.
Outdoor settings, particularly parks and open spaces, afforded
the highest number of functioning in the ‘Love’ and ‘Perfect’ col-
lages. Affordances requiring physical activity included playing
organized sports, playing with friends, climbing trees and over play
equipment, however more passive activities such as resting, relax-
ing, and sitting on benches also featured. One child featured pho-
tographs of stones and trees, noting she liked to keep objects as
‘‘a memory of my trip”. Streets were also common settings and
afforded many positive functioning for children, including walking
to school, being with friends, playing in the cul-de-sac, and also
appreciating nature such as street trees, gardens and wildlife.
Streets were also referred to in children’s ‘Hate’ collages, but these
all related to lack of facilities (such as paths) and barriers to walk-
ing (including busy roads). One child’s ‘Hate’ collage contains a
photograph of a truck that is parked across the footpath. The anno-
tation reads: ‘‘House getting built. Truck parked in the middle of the
footpath ”. References to cycling were not frequent but when
included, cycling was associated with streets outside children’s
homes, which appeared to be an important place valued by the





Female (n = 90)                                  ANOVA
Mean                   Std. Deviation            F               p
354                    343                       30.519          <0.001
5.63                   4.35                      16.576          <0.001
3.47                   1.02                      14.199          <0.001




Hull, and 95% CE vs max distance from home for actual travel.

90                                                          C. Babb et al. / Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


Table 5
Summary of content analysis reporting three highest codes (frequencies).

Categories                               Hate Collage                                          Love Collage                                   Perfect Collage
Activities/behavior                      Walking (4)                                           Sports (15)                                    Play (11)
Taking a photo in the car (4)                         Play (15)                                      Sport (7)
Sport (4)                                             Resting/relaxing (4)                           Skateboarding (5)
Passenger in a car (4)
Shopping (4)
Walking the dog (4)
Agents/Objects                           Car (8)                                               Friends (12)                                   Trees (10)
Traffic (6)                                           Family (8)                                     Other children (5)
Bins (5)                                              Other children (6)                             Vegetation (5)
Rubbish (5)                                                                                          Wildlife (4)
Pets (4)
Places                                   Streets (13)                                          Park or open spaces (17)                       Park or open spaces
Parks or reserves (12)                                                                               Streets (12)
School (10)                                           Sporting ground (15)                           ‘My street’ (11)
Home (15)
Attitudes/feelings                       No facilities (7)                                     Proximity (7)                                  Proximity (8)
Dirt (6)                                              Safety (4)                                     Expansiveness/Scale
‘‘Busy roads” (5)                                     Fun (4)                                        Safety (4)
‘‘Don’t hate anything” (5)




Fig. 8. Example of a Perfect photo-collage from a child with high-realized local activity space (81% of the 30 min potential activity space).




children for enabling play, activity and socializing. Relating to this,                      themes on positive functionings in the neighborhood, showed a
the theme of proximity was relatively common in the children’s                               striking difference in that natural spaces and parks featured more
‘Love’ and ‘Perfect’ collages, with children indicating they would                           prominently in the photo-collages of children with high-realized
like to live closer to parks and natural spaces.                                             local activity spaces. Children with low-realized local activity
The photo-collages of boys and girls, children of different ages                         spaces tended to include photographs of their home environment
and children with varying licences to be independent were com-                               and more formal outdoor settings, like organized sports venues,
pared yet did not reveal any substantial variation. A comparison                             reflecting the tendency for children to lead more ‘‘bubble wrapped”
of photo-collages between children with high and low ratios of                               lifestyles and ‘‘backseat” modes of mobility (Karsten, 2005). Figs. 6
realized to potential local activity spaces while revealing similar                          and 7 illustrate these differences (Figs. 8and 9).


















(22)




(4)





















C. Babb et al. / Travel Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


There was a more noteworthy difference evident in the ‘Hate’                            Our sample of children was not very active. Their trips were
collages of children with high- and low-realized activity spaces.                      short, including many driving trips that could have easily been
Children with the lowest realized activity spaces made no refer-                       walked. This unsettling finding is also shown in other research.
ences to street features that constrain activities such as walking,                    For example, in Montreal. Morency and Demers (2010) found that
cycling and playing. Furthermore, references to being driven were                      33% of all trips under 1 km (31.2% of all trips made by children 5–
only noted in the group of children with low-realized activity                         14 years) were motorized. Only nine children were granted the
spaces. Alternatively, aspects such as heavy traffic, unsafe cross-                    licences to walk TO and FROM school, cross the roads and ride a
ings, lack of facilities and bullies were common amongst children                      bike on the main roads unaccompanied, which shows that even
with high-realized activity spaces, suggesting that these children                     in a green, safe, friendly neighborhood children are not ‘‘free
were more aware of their neighborhood spaces. One child with a                         range”. This is consistent with the results obtained by Loebach
high-realized local activity space noted: ‘‘This is the street I walk                  and Gilliland (2016a), who found that 95% of all the active time
down to get to the park. It would be nice if there was a path”. Accord-                spent within the activity space was within 400 m from home. Boys
ingly, children with higher-realized activity spaces were more crit-                   seem to walk longer distances and have larger realized activity
ical of barriers to walking and cycling in streets and actively sought                 spaces, confirming previous findings that gender is an important
to propose ways their environments could change to support more                        conversion factor allowing children to expand the spatial range
walking and activity in the neighborhood.                                              of potential functionings associated with local travel (Klinker
et al., 2014); yet, this was still minimal compared to the potential
they could reach (25%). Only four children reached 50% of the
6. Discussion
potential activity space that can be covered in 30 min by walking,
even with good access to recreational and shopping facilities
This research adds to the body of knowledge with a new case
(about 9% of the suburb area), local parks (almost 9% of the area
study and a novel methodology. We have employed activity spaces
within a 30 min walk of the school), and the river shore.
and affordance as conceptual tools to explore what Fleuret and
Despite the understanding that children can achieve physical
Atkinson (2007) refer to as ‘spaces of capability’, or the place based
activity through other means, the limited functionings achieved
resources, functionings and capabilities relevant to children’s local
by the children through active travel is concerning, considering
travel. As children’s active travel affords physical activity, play,
the role active travel may contribute to children’s wellbeing and
exploring and social engagement, the volume of walking and
the well documented consequences of sedentary lifestyle: preva-
cycling is of interest to understanding the role of local activity
lence of impaired metabolic health, cardio-respiratory fitness, obe-
spaces in shaping children’s wellbeing. In our case study, insight
sity (Cooper et al., 2006; Roth et al., 2012) and lower cognitive
into the children’s capability to achieve wellbeing is gained by
performance and mental and social development (Rissotto and
using potential activity spaces based on WHO standards.




Fig. 9. Example of a Perfect photo-collage from a child with low-realized local activity space (1.3% of the 30 min potential activity space).
91


















































92                                              C. Babb et al. / Travel


Tonucci, 2002; Villanueva et al., 2012). These effects are especially
damaging for children (Nishimura et al., 2013), given their early
developmental stages. As already highlighted, reduced indepen-
dent mobility associated with unrealized local activity space may
decrease children’s opportunities to learn about their neighbor-
hood (Rissotto and Tonucci, 2002) and affect negatively their mood
compared to children who use more active travel (Westman et al.,
2016).
In our study, an evaluation of the capability sets derived from
children’s realized activity spaces provide little evidence that the
local neighborhood is currently utilized as a resource to enhance
children’s wellbeing through active and independent mobility.
However as Noah (2015, p. 463) suggests, a subjective understand-
ing of activity spaces is important to enable ‘‘a more comprehensive
understanding of individuals’ and families’ neighborhood and activity
spaces”, and hence elucidate active travel heterogeneity and moti-
vations within the same geographical space. The photo-collages
show how children evaluated their own neighborhood and pro-
vided a different and more optimistic picture of the potential for
local activity spaces to afford functionings associated with
enhanced wellbeing. Drawing on the capability approach, the local
neighborhood affords children a rich variety of positive function-
ings in line with a broader concept of wellbeing: socializing, being
active, playing organized sport, collecting objects and keepsakes,
and finding a private space. While the data from the photo-
collages was not during the same time period as the GPS data (in
order to avoid distortion to normal travel patterns), the children’s
interpretations of neighborhood indicated the high value placed on
parks, natural spaces and play spaces to achieve a range of func-
tionings associated with wellbeing.
Children embodied the role of ‘environmental change agents’
(Malone, 2013), actively evaluating the potential functionings
afforded by their local activity spaces to see how their own and
other children’s wellbeing could be enhanced through more active
and independent travel. A critical stance was taken by some chil-
dren noting the lack of pedestrian infrastructure, barriers to walk-
ing, the distance of places to their homes and the need to improve
the safety of crossings, indicating what Kyttä (2004) refers to as the
field of constrained action, or perceived functionings that children
can convert into achievable ‘doings’ and ‘beings’. However, chil-
dren’s use of their potential local activity space is not entirely
shaped by the design of their neighborhood, but also by the
licences to be independently mobile granted by parents. Yet, even
when these licences to travel independently in the local neighbor-
hood existed, few active and independent trips were recorded, sug-
gesting other limiting factors for achieving independent and active
travel as a key functioning for children. The freedom to reason and
choose from various potential functionings is implicit within the
capability approach and this, in a sense, problematizes the notion
of a licence for independent mobility as a measure of children’s
wellbeing. Given that the photo-collages contained children’s eval-
uation of the constrained affordances associated with dangerous
road crossings, lack of infrastructure and other threats such as bul-
lies and older children, it is also possible that some children in our
sample just decided not to make opportunities to travel
independently.
It has been well documented that studies using mixed methods
to capture objective and subjective data on children’s travel activ-
ity can be onerous and result in attrition in the sample size. This
was certainly our experience with this research. Therefore, a

trade-off is needed between the range of socio-behavioral and spa-

tial data required and the representativeness of the resulting data.
The single case-study methodology and small sample do limit gen-

eralizations regarding children’s wellbeing in their local, mobility
environments. Furthermore, although a more holistic indication
of wellbeing was sought there were relevant activities that were
Behaviour and Society 9 (2017) 81–94


not captured. One issue is that although the low level of active tra-
vel is concerning, this represents only travel-related walking and
cycling, without including physical activity within the confines of
school or other planned sportive events (team sports, swimming,
etc.). However, the in-depth data collection and analysis provides
an important contribution to the knowledge of how local activity
spaces can provide for and inhibit children’s wellbeing. In this
respect, our approach of developing evidence of the factors shaping
children’s wellbeing using a capability approach or providing qual-
itative insights into activity spaces, represents a ‘proof of concept’
which may be further tested and applied in other contexts.

7. Conclusion

Children’s activity spaces involving active modes of travel con-
tinue to shrink worldwide, regardless of the opportunities of hav-
ing activities within the proximity of home, which children could
explore. This paper reported on a case study in Perth, Western Aus-
tralia, using a capability approach to explain some of the complex-
ities of children’s wellbeing as it is shaped by their local
neighborhood activity spaces. While many of the children in the
case study seem to have more of the ‘‘indoor and backseat child-
hoods” (at least compared to previous generations), there is a pos-
itive outlook towards children’s healthy development through
children’s own evaluations of their local activity spaces. The find-
ings indicate there is much potential for a capability framework
to build on existing studies that use geo-spatial tools (such as
activity spaces) and concepts such as affordances to develop a dee-
per understanding of how children’s independent and active travel
can lead to enhanced wellbeing. Furthermore, the capability
approach’s emphasis on potential and realized functionings and
the agency to select pathways to wellbeing, provide an opportunity
for new conceptualizations of children’s independent and active
travel and may suggest new approaches for planners and policy
makers to consider.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded by an Australian Research Council
Discovery Grant (DP1094495) Children, Active Travel, Connected-
ness and Health (CATCH). The authors wish to acknowledge the
national research partners at Griffith University, University of Mel-
bourne, University of New South Wales, and Central Queensland
University for their role in research design and methods. We also
thank the children, parents, guardians and schools who assisted
with this research, and the research assistants who provided assis-
tance with data collection.


Appendix A

The Activity Space measured as a bivariate confidence ellipse
(CE) represents the area in which the child travels and spends time
for various activities with a certain probability within a day (e.g.
95%).
The size and the orientation of the confidence ellipse are deter-
mined mathematically as follows (also, please refer to Schönfelder
and Axhausen, 2003; Buliung and Kanaroglou, 2006; Rai et al.,
2007; Botte, 2015):
      2     
x  x    yy 2
þ        ¼1                                              ð1Þ
a        b

where     represent the Easting and Northing coordinates of the
x; y
centre of gravity of the set of activity locations and a and b are
the lengths of the major and minor elliptical axes.
The parametric form of the ellipse rotated by angle h is:
