

Urban Studies
45(13) 2829-2848, December 2008




Exploring Social Mobilities: Narratives
of Walking and Driving in Auckland,
New Zealand
Catherine E. Bean, Robin Kearns and Damian Collins

[Paper first received , August 2006; in final form, November 2007]




Abstract

Recent studies have discussed the important role of the automobile in shaping
contemporary urban social life. This research used a series of focus groups in Auckland,
New Zealand, to illuminate the complex social attitudes and values associated with
walking as well as driving. While the car is the dominant transport mode in Auckland,
the shortcomings as well as the benefits of automobile use and dependence are well
known. Moreover, while walking is often difficult in this urban environment, it
continues to be perceived as a potentially useful and appropriate means of transport,
and as an important and valued social practice. The paper's findings suggest that the
positive perceptions of walking, as a facilitator of health and social life, could be built
upon by policy-makers to encourage a greater use of this active form of travel.



Introduction                                             environments and a related acknowledge-
ment of the need to reduce vehicle dependence
and encourage active travel, which most
As the most basic form of mobility, walking
has become increasingly marginalised in obviously encompasses walking but also
many Western cities as traffic congestion   includes cycling.
and automobile-oriented design have driven Various social problems are attributed to
walkers from the streets (Frank et al. , 2004;
increased automobile dependency in cities,
Giles-Corti and Donovan, 2003; Saelens      including social exclusion for those without
et al. , 2003). This situation exacerbates access to a car, and a loss of community and
reliance on the private motor vehicle for street life (Hine and Mitchell, 2003; Sheller,
everyday activities. Yet there is growing con- 2004; Sheller and Urry, 2000; Southworth,
cern about the unsustainability of urban 2003). These problems are accompanied by

Catherine E. Bean and Robin Kearns are in the School of Geography, Geology and Environmental
Science, The University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, 1001, New Zealand. E-mails:
r.kearns@auckland.ac.nz, cathyebean@yahoo.co.nz.
Damian Collins is in the Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. E-mail: damian.collins@ualberta.ca.

0042-0980 Print/1 360-063X Online
© 2008 Urban Studies Journal Limited
DOI: 10.1177/0042098008098208




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms































































2830 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL .



public health concerns such as automobileperceptions and prevalent cultural norms may
well be more crucial determinants of travel
accidents (Feyer and Langley, 2000; Tobias
and Turley, 2005) and the disease burden behaviour and neighbourhood sociability
(McMillan,
associated with declining physical activity and      2007; du Toit et al , 2007).
Given this context, our concern centres on
increasing obesity (for example, Mackett
if socialities
et al y 2005). It is generally agreed that,the our         associated with two different
forms of quotidian mobility - driving and
cities are to have improved environmental
walking.
and social conditions, a larger proportion of    We note that the automobility
literature emphasises the emergence of new
local travel needs to take the form of walking
and cycling.                                                sets of social activities and expectations in
This said, car use is now fundamentally                    cities associated with growing dependence
embedded in everyday social relations and                   on the automobile. Yet pedestrians have not
brings with it many benefits. By way of ex-                disappeared from city streets and particular
ample, Maxwell (2001) has shown that the                    forms of sociality continue to be associated
use of a car can be an expression of help, care            with the act of walking. Importantly, the social
or love for others. More generally, cars are               perceptions and experiences associated with
associated with 'enjoying' a social life, pro-             both forms of mobility are variegated, and
mising the ability to travel (almost) anywhere,            even ambiguous. Specifically, then, the re-
at any time. The social importance and value               search we report on asks two questions: what
of the car stem, in large part, from auto-                 social practices and beliefs accompany walk-
oriented urban design and the associated                   ing in our case study city of Auckland, New
dispersion of land uses, which frequently                   Zealand; and how do these practices and
make car ownership and use necessary, or at                beliefs depart from, and interplay with, the
least strongly beneficial.                                  socialities associated with automobility?
Recognition of the environmental and                     Our interest in the social is focused, in particu-
social costs of car use have prompted efforts              lar, on the choices, activities and interactions
to reform land use patterns in order to make               associated with everyday household life,
urban environments less car dependent and                  work, education and leisure.
more oriented towards walking, cycling                       Our paper aims to enrich the academic
and public transit. These efforts include the              debate on urban mobilities in several ways.
new urbanism, compact city, smart growth,                  First, it extends the literature by examining
transit-oriented development and urban                     the social effects that car dependence has had
villages movements, all of which promote                   on walking as a form of mobility and social
some combination of concentrated develop-                  practice. Secondly, it takes seriously the social-
ment, interconnected streets, mixed land                   ities of walking itself. Thirdly, it seeks to flesh
uses and proximity to public transport nodes.              out the discussion of mobilities through re-
These approaches help to make walking a                    flection on how the contradictions associated
more viable travel option by decreasing dis-               with car use are understood and experienced
tances between the origins and destinations                by a range of individuals. While a growing
of many trips (Southworth, 1997; Southworth                body of literature investigates the social di-
and Ben-Joseph, 2003; Thompson-Fawcett                     mensions of car use, the social dimensions of
and Bond, 2003). The integration of land                   other transport modes - and the ways these
use and transport planning is a key element                modes impact upon the everyday sociality
in creating more sustainable cities. However,              of the city - have not been examined to the
recent research has shown that while the                   same extent. By way of example, writing on
automobility has considered the ways in
issue of urban form is important, peoples'




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


































































EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIES 2831



which the car has changed the everyday    reflect on the socialities and civilities of
wesites,
each,
spatialities and socialities of parenting    and on the connections between travel
and
Our and embodied experiences of the
caring for children (Dowling, 2000).choices
whileas well as sense of place in the city.
research contributes to this tradition, urban,
We investigate these themes using data
also emphasising that parenting is still con-
ducted while walking. Indeed, walking  can from a series of focus groups con-
derived
be perceived as an important part of  the in mid 2005. This study sought to
ducted
parent-child relationship.         engage transport users in a discussion of
Our focus on walking, as opposed to other
Auckland's transport and its future, with the
view that, if sustainable and active forms of
alternatives to car use (specifically, cycling
and public transport), reflects in part the are to be promoted, then it is im-
mobility
particularities of Auckland (see the Context
portant to understand the experiences and
while
section). More generally, we note that,social meanings of current transport modes.
in an travel is socially informed, and also
walking has become marginalisedBecause
automobilised urban world, there are multiple
affected by the highly developed and nuanced
social
imperatives pointing to its continued rele-and cultural meanings attached to
vance to considerations of urban transport
different modes, an understanding of these
issues. While all alternatives to motorised             meanings is relevant to the study of transp
private transport may contribute to the causes
and, in particular, travel behaviour change.
of urban sustainability, physical activity In the remainder of the paper, we survey
and reduced traffic congestion, walking is       the connections between the social experi-
distinguished by its extremely low cost andences and patterns of daily urban life, and
simplicity (for example, no knowledge of        the practices of walking and driving. We then
timetables is required) and by the simple        discuss the urban context of our study before
notion that it is possible for a very broad spec-proceeding to outline our method and the
trum of the population (including those toocharacteristics of our participants. In the fol-
young, or infirm, to cycle). Moreover, a sub-
lowing section, we present selected findings
stantial literature on urban public spaces   of our focus group research, granting par-
(reviewed later) points to the importance   ticular attention to the experience of walking
of pedestrians in contributing to the social and driving, and the socialities associated
with each. Our concluding section reflects
life and vibrancy of cities. While cycling and
riding public transport may also be accom-  on the importance of examining dialogue for
panied by particular forms of sociality, theyrevealing the tensions between co-existing
are not the focus of this study.             socialities of walking and driving. We con-
tend that social beliefs can be a determinant
Traditionally, transport literature has been
dominated by quantitative research, with   of transport practice in addition to consid-
erations of urban form, infrastructure and
many studies using techniques such as travel
surveys or traffic volume data in order to levels of service of different transport modes.
understand travel behaviour. Qualitative
studies examining the talk associated with
Walking and Driving in the City
transport modes are now appearing (for
The rise of the automobile and the subse-
example, Guiver, 2007). We aim to contribute
quent reshaping of towns and cities to cater
to emerging discussion by providing an exam-
for auto-centred transport have had far-
ination of social experiences related to walk-
ing and driving in Auckland, where these arereaching effects on many aspects of everyday
the two main transport modes. Specifically,life. Only recently, however, have researchers




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms






































ort













































2832 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL.



begun to examine the social and cultural
of ills stemming from the automobilisation of
urban life.
changes which have accompanied increasing
automobile use (for example, noting theThe
waysincreasing dominance of the auto-
mobile
that cars have changed everyday practices   has had fundamental effects on the
form
of sociality, family life, work, education   of many cities, such as the growth
and
leisure, as well as increasing the distances of large roads and motorways, low-density
which people need and expect to travel            for development, single-use zoning,
suburban
everyday purposes).                          as well as phenomena such as petrol stations,
The term 'automobility' has been auto       coined
repair centres, motels, ribbon develop-
to describe the ways that the car has recon- ment and drive-in fast-food outlets (Relph,
figured social life, especially in cities, by1976).
trans-To a considerable extent, these sites
forming our ways of organising, moving
have replaced 'walking places', such as those
through and living in time-space (Beckmann,
areas made up of high-density urban develop-
2001; Freund and Martin, 1993; Sheller,
ment with mixed land uses in close proxim-
2004; Sheller and Urry, 2000; Taylor,    2003;
ity, as well as paved surfaces for walking,
greenery,
Urry, 2004). Other theorists have dealt with     rest areas and ample public space
and 2000).
(Solnit,
the ubiquity of the car in modern cities
the ways in which it has become funda-
Socialities and Civilities
mentally embedded in everyday social
relations and cultural life (Brandon, 2002; and automobility create starkly
Walking
Miller, types of socialities. Walking is an
Jain and Guiver, 2001; Maxwell, 2001; opposed
2001; Wollen and Kerr, 2002). These writers
inherently social activity because of the
have documented the transformative effects             likelihood of interaction between th
that the car has had on the built environ-              and other people, especially those
foot. It has been argued to be a form of
ment, as well as the geopolitical global order
'urban togetherness', even when one is alone
(Pinney, 2002), and have convincingly argued
among strangers, because it allows the walker
that the system of automobility is inherently
self-perpetuating (Beckmann, 2001; Urry,   to establish and maintain intimacy and fami-
2004). Automobility has altered the spatio-liarity with a community (Macauley, 2000).
temporalities of everyday life because the A landmark study by Appleyard and Lintell
automobilisation of our cities has promoted(1972) found that streets designed for pede-
strians ('liveable streets') increase levels of
a dispersal of activities necessitating faster
and further travel.                                    social interaction, children's play
As automobility has become dominant,      bouring behaviours. Likewise a recent study
other forms of mobility (including walking, by Lund (2003) found that people who walk
cycling and public transport) have been sub-frequently are more likely than those who
ordinated (Sheller and Urry, 2000). Walkingdrive to have unplanned interaction with their
has been replaced with sitting, riding and  neighbours and to form social ties in their
driving, and has been predominantly recon-  neighbourhood. This type of unanticipated
ceptualised as an inconvenient, slow mode   interaction may cultivate "a web of public
to
of travel. Indeed, for many, not havingrespect      and trust, and a resource in time of
walk has become an important marker personalof        or neighbourhood need" (Jacobs,
socioeconomic success (Amato, 2004). This   1961, p. 56).
said, we argue that walking continues to be   Recent work has also highlighted the im-
portance of local community facilities and
a highly social and public form of mobility,
walkable environments in fostering social
with considerable potential to address a range




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms














































e walker
also on












and neigh-
























EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIES 2833



integration. In one Auckland neighbour-
Critically, this isolation may be most acutely
hood, a                           felt by those without access to a car.
Recent research, however, has cast the
dearth of local shops, services and parks along             motor vehicle in a more positive light. This
with a challenging topography inhibited                     work has highlighted the ways in which cars
the foot traffic that might contribute to the
are enmeshed in contemporary patterns of
interaction and opportunistic encounters that
sociality and that much of what is considered
contribute to social cohesion (Witten et al .,
social life is facilitated by the car, which has
2003, p. 336).
stretched and expanded what is possible
(see Brandon, 2002; Wollen and Kerr, 2002). In
Elsewhere, Leyden (2003) found that people
fact, it is hard to overstate the extent to which
living in walkable, mixed-use neighbourhoods
the car is interwoven into contemporary social
feel more connected to their community and
and family life, work, education and leisure:
are more likely to know their neighbours,
the car affects where and how we live, attend
to trust or have faith in other people and
school, shop, work, holiday and even how we
to contact elected officials to express their
perceive the world (Brandon, 2002).
concerns. While issues of topography and
At the same time that automobility offers
urban form are important, perceptions and
independence, it also coerces people into an
social norms have been shown to be equally,
intense flexibility (Sheller and Urry, 2000).
if not more, important determinants of travel
It enables people to juggle their family life,
behaviours such as interactions and general
commitments and leisure through time and
neighbourhood sociability (McMillan, 2007;
space - but, in so doing, contributes to an
du Toit et al , 2007).
environment in which stretched socialities
Although a range of social interactions
are also required , or at least expected. Much
can occur while citizens are walking (and to
of what many contemporary city-dwellers
an extent through cycling or taking public                    consider to be their social life would be im-
transport), these have less opportunity to
possible without a car.
develop when people are cocooned inside pri-
It is critical to appreciate, however, that
vate motor vehicles, moving between private
while people's social networks have been
spaces such as the home and the workplace
extended, it was automobility that dispersed
(Freund and Martin, 1993). This situation
these networks to begin with, by facilitating
has implications for public spaces, many of                   the spatial distancing of social networks.
which become degraded and stripped of                         Automobility both makes dispersion pos-
meaning, and for sociality, as personal inter-
sible and creates a demand for flexibility
actions are generally confined to individual                  that, to date, only automobiles have been
vehicles (Bull, 2004; Morse, 1998).                           able to satisfy (Urry, 2004). The downside
The automobile has also had more subtle
is that automobility creates longer distances
effects: the replacement of residential frontto be travelled in shorter time-spans even
porches with garages, for example, has
for those who cannot, or would rather not,
contributed to a loss of neighbourhood
participate in such travel. Moreover, daily
interaction and natural surveillance (Jackson,'taskscapes' and routines have been reshaped
1985; Jacobs, 1961). These factors have led toin order to allow for the flow of traffic
isolation for some people in car-dependent
so that, for instance, children walking to
suburbs, increasing the privatisation of school must negotiate traffic, roads and
everyday life and decreasing the sense ofintersections (Dant and Martin, 2001; Sheller
community in many neighbourhoods. and Urry, 2000).




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
























































































2834 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL.


chauffeur their children between activ-
In these respects, automobility hastotrans-
ities and that this chauffeuring partially
formed the socio-spatial patterns of everyday
constitutes societal constructions of 'good
life and played a pivotal role in the compres-
parenting'
sion of time which has accompanied late   (Dowling, 2000). Cultures of
modernity (Harvey, 1989). The pace parentsof lifechauffeuring their children between
supervised activities have developed and are
has accelerated; the result is not only further,
but also faster, travel. People are now      able by these societal pressures.
cultivated
to schedule many small fragments of time,
The Walking Body in the City
creating complex, patterns of social life. One
consequence is that                                       Walking as an embodied, material, social,
everyday urban practice is best understood
social relations become 'lifted-out of local
by reference to de Certeau s (1984) influential
contexts of interaction and are restructured
study of walking in the city. He begins by
across indefinite spans of time-space
taking the reader through an account of
(Beckmann, 2001, p. 600).
viewing New York from the top of the World
While human activity has been stretched Trade Centre, where one is transformed into
across space as a result of automobility,a god-like spectator/reader or a voyeur who
the (re)compression of this space and time is able to view the concept city. From here,
made possible by car use is not universally one can read a type of representation of the
or uniformly available. Automobility is dis-              'text' of the city. However, this representation
proportionately unavailable to those either is not the true text of the city. Rather, the
unable to drive (children and many elderly'true' urban text is written by the 'ordinary
and disabled people) and those unable to practitioners' of the city who 'write' the
afford to run a car (Banister and Bowling, urban text as they walk. What is suggested by
2004; Hillman, 2001; Hine and Mitchell,    de Certeau is that organic practices such as
2003; Jain and Guiver, 2001). This inequity walking actually create the city.
lends support to initiatives such as the Slow Embodiment in the city is interwoven
City movement, which aims to create calmer, with walking. Walking is one of the primary
less polluted environments, conserving localways a body can experience a city. Amato
aesthetic traditions and enabling residents (2004) has argued that walkers make the
to return to the "traditional rhythms of com- city that they walk, but he adds that walkers
munity life" (Knox, 2005, p. 6).              also become the city which they walk, because
The effect of automobility on children is it is walkers who give life to a city. He argues
mixed. On the one hand, those who live in that walking restores neighbourhoods, lures
a household which has a car may experience tourists and shoppers, makes streets beauti-
greater mobility (although not autonomy) ful and adds vitality and life to urban areas.
by being transported between various sites Thus walkers can add to the sociality as well as
and destinations. On the other hand, auto- the character of a city simply by being there.
mobility has also led to a well-documented According to Jane Jacobs ( 1961 ), an unwalked
withdrawal of children from streets and                  city is a dead city and, arguably, no city at all,
as it is walking that imbues a city with life.
public space due to their own and/or their
The relationship between body and city is
parents' increased fear of traffic accidents,
also explained by Grosz (1992), who argues
as well as various types of crime (see Black
that bodies and their environments mutu-
et al. , 2001; Lam, 2001; Tranter and Pawson,
ally constitute each other. While the city is
2001; Valentine, 1997). Research in suburban
constructed to mirror and house the body,
Sydney has found that mothers feel pressure




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms










































































EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIES 2835



in turn the body is transformed into a hearing,
dis-     and the ability of city smells to
tinctively urban body (see also Pile, 1996).
penetrate the car is limited. This said, a range
embodied experiences
ofsite
The city affects the body because it is the                                              are impossi
without
for the body's cultural and social saturation.    the car.

Thrift (2004, p. 48) has developed the
The body is transformed, (re)examined, con-
hybrid concept of the car-driver to show that
tested and reinscribed by images, representa-
the is "an extraordinarily complex everyday
there
tional systems, the mass media and arts in
ecology of driving" due to the tactical meas-
city. In turn, the (cultural) body transforms
ures people use to navigate their way around
the urban according to its needs. Meanwhile,
ways on a daily basis. Extending the work of
the shape and form of a city affect the cities
its inhabitants live and their physicality -
de Certeau, he argues that there is a complex
the of driving behaviours, just as there
world
for example, through the type of terrain
is a complex web of walking behaviours.
body must traverse daily and the nutrition
available (Grosz, 1992).              Moreover, the hybridity of the car-driver is
deepening because driving is increasingly
Because walking for transport has declined
as a social and cultural practice in Western
assisted by technological add-ons with soft-
that and ergonomics resulting in cars and
cities (Solnit, 2000), it can be arguedware
While being much more intertwined (Thrift,
contemporary city life is less corporeal. bodies
1994, 2004). Due to this mutuality and the
being in a car is still a corporeal experience,
layers of social meaning stamped on cars,
it reduces opportunities for many sensory
the is
perceptions and physical exertions, and   world of driving is arguably becoming as
thanand convoluted as the world of walking
therefore a less embodied experience rich
walking (a point elaborated on in the (Thrift,
next    2004).
section). This 'decorporealisation' is linked
Just as walkers (re)create place in the city
to urban form; autocentric cities are on con-
a daily basis, so drivers (re) create driving
structing driving subjects, who are in turn
places through their varied practices, tactics,
constructing driving cities.                            strategies and appropriations of space (for
example, Falconer and Kingham, 2007).
The Driving Body in the City                            Baudrillard has commented on the creation

Freund and Martin (1993) and Taylor (2003)
of Los Angeles, in which car-drivers act out
less
have argued that driving involves aa car-oriented     city in order to (re)invent
'auto-scapes' on a daily basis. The result is a
authentic sensory experience than walking,
because all experiences of the urban    are
"[g]igantic,  spontaneous spectacle of auto-
filtered though the car. Exterior sights,
mobile traffic. A total collective act, staged
smells, sounds and sensations are diluted,
by the entire population" (Baudrillard, 1988,
pp. 52-53).
while interior ones are controlled through
devices such as air conditioners or stereos.
Thus, Grosz's (1992) contention that em-
The car's controls and wheels act as an
bodied citizens and cities mutually constitute
andother may be extended to car-drivers
intermediary between bodies and citieseach
the visual sense is heightened but made
creating autocentric cities. The question then
re-
banal by the speed at which the car isbecomes    whether the types of places created
quired to move (Taylor, 2003). The sound    walkers and car-drivers are fundamen-
by of
tally different, one being created by em-
the car and personally constructed sound-
of selves and the other by hybridised
bodied
scapes inside the car also dull the effect
the urban on the driver's or passenger'scar-drivers.




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms










ble




























































































2836 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL.


Mobilities and Urban Sense of Place                    automobiles and auto-oriented environments,
and that social relations are restored in su
'Driving places', or 'auto-scapes', have fre-
places. Drivers perceive and attach meanings
quently been characterised as Unauthentic' to places in the course of driving, having
conversations, reading maps and so on
places: terms such as 'placeslessness', 'non-
(Laurier, 2004; Merriman, 2004; Weber, 2004).
places' and the geography of nowhere' point
to environments devoid of identity and
Even Augé (1995, p. 79) acknowledges that
meaning (Arefi, 2004; Augé, 1995; Kunstler,
non-place "never exists in pure form" and
1993; Morse, 1998; Relph, 1976). The termcontends that "place and non-place" should
'non-place' was originally coined by Webber
be perceived as "opposed polarities: the first
(1964), who used it to describe the new era
is never completely erased, the second never
in which accessibility had become more
totally completed".
important than proximity or propinquity.
The extent to which walking places should
Place-bound communities had become less                be considered 'authentic', or as likely to
significant due to the rise of communication
foster sense of place, also requires consider-
and transport technologies, and instead
ation. Walking arguably leads to a stronger
'communities of interest' were replacing them.
place attachment, as surroundings are less
likely to be "constituted as scenery and
More recently Marc Augé (1995) has used the
term to describe places which are not rela-
spectacle or postcard-like picture. Rather,
tional, historical or concerned with identity,
the world is more readily experienced as
using the examples of airports, freeways andinhabited placescape" (Macauley, 2000, p. 9).
shopping malls. However, the defining fea-
This notion evokes the flâneur , for whom
tures of non-places, according to Augé, are
walking at a slow pace was regarded as the best
their specific functions (transport, commerce,
way to uncover the urban (Sinclair, 1997).
leisure) and the means of communication The equation of walking places with
within them (individuals interact increasingly
authenticity is not straightforward. Highly
with texts such as signs and instructions   manufactured and highly controlled places,
rather than other individuals). Augé frequ- from Disneyland to new urbanist town
centres, may be built on a walkable scale,
ently refers to motorways as one of the quint-
essential non-places, in that they avoid or with many attractive pedestrian routes, yet
us not necessarily authentic (Relph, 1976;
by-pass all the places to which they take are
(see Sinclair, 2006).                       Kroloff, 1997). The same can be said for the
Bull (2004) argues that the term non-placeshopping mall which, although it is in large
can be used to refer to any environment  - a by-product of automobility, also pro-
part
passed through by an automobile, because
vides an ideal strolling environment inside
its doors.
many drivers claim that the spaces they move
through hold little or no meaning for them. Therefore, while automobile-oriented
It is important to note that, according to Bull,
places have often been associated with non-
the non-space of the world outside the car isplaces and placelessness, and walking with
overlaid by the meaning which is attached
authentic experiences of place, it is clear that
to, and emanates from, the car itself. The
these are generalisations. Contemporary
notion that automobile-dominated placesurban life is increasingly experienced in the
are necessarily 'non-places' is highly contest-
car. Subsequently, automobiles, along with
able. For example, Merriman (2004, p. 146)   their associated environments, are given
argues that "transient, mobile and momen-    meaning by the people who use them. In
tary" senses of place can be experienced in  addition, some walking environments are




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms




ch
















































































EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIE



public transport patronage declined steadily
contrived and can be interpreted as inauth-
the mid 1990s in what has been described
untiland
entic. However, it is evident that walkers
as oneIn
car-drivers create very different places.     of the most spectacular declines in
addition, they experience place differently
public transport patronage of any developed
in the world (Mees and Dodson, 2001).
cityper-
because of the varying levels of sensory
ception and attention to the detail ofConversely,
place.     private car ownership and the
Walking internalises the relationship     be- car's share of total trip rates stead-
private
ily increased. Auckland now has one of the
tween the body and place, while landscapes
and places outside the car windscreen      are car ownership rates in the world
highest
experienced as separate and external.(Auckland
While     Regional Council, 2005) and ex-
it is possible to say that individuals   may "severe road congestion and argu-
periences
become attached to the places theyably  drive
the worst public transport levels of any
in the world city with a population of
through, the lack of attention to detailwestern
car than
more
landscape, and the intermediary of the     s    one million" (Laird et al ., 2001,
body between the driver and the earth, areUnsurprisingly, transport is one of the
p. 2).
likely to diminish this attachment.                    region's most significant political
Rising concerns for safety have accom-
Context                                  panied  increasing vehicle use. Pedestrian
injury rates have hovered at around 400
Our study is situated in Auckland, New  reported casualties per year for the Auckland
a
Zealand (2006 population: 1.6 million),region   over the past decade (Land Transport
metropolitan area with extremely high andNew Zealand, 2005), despite a widespread
rising rates of vehicle ownership and use,
withdrawal of child pedestrians from the
and worsening traffic congestion (Aucklandstreet as parents increasingly chauffeur chil-
Regional Council, 2005). Auckland's trans-
dren from one activity to another (Collins
port 'problem' includes air pollution that
and Kearns, 2001; Kearns and Collins, 2003).
leads to over 250 premature deaths each year,
This increased level of parental chauffeuring
traffic accidents that kill around 80 indi- is documented in many Western cities (for
viduals each year and an underdeveloped example, Mullan, 2003; O'Brien et al , 2000).
public transport system (Fisher et a/., 2002;
Data from the Auckland Regional Council
Land Transport New Zealand, 2005; Mees (2005) reveal the car's dominance in Auck-
and Dodson, 2001). These limitations are land: private vehicles account for 78 per cent
compounded by sprawling land use pat-of all journeys. Walking is the second-most
terns, which reduce the ease of travellingcommon travel mode (accounting for 13 per
by modes other than private car. Indeed cent of all journeys, including approximately
Auckland's transport system is dominated40 per cent of journeys less than 2 kilometres
by a car-and-motorway system, with other  in length). In addition, walking is a compon-
forms of transport accounting for only ancil-ent of most public transport trips and many
lary modal shares.                           car trips. Public transport (buses, trains
Prior to the 1950s, Auckland's publicand ferries) accounts for 7 per cent of trips,
transport patronage was high, with reports while cycling is an extremely residual travel
claiming that between 50 and 58 per centmode, making up only 1 per cent. The low
of all trips involved this mode (Aucklandlevel is due, in large part, to safety concerns:
Regional Planning Authority, 1955; Meesthe Auckland Regional Transport Authority
and Dodson, 2001). However, following(2007, p. 10) reports that "over half of
road construction from the 1950s onwards,
Aucklanders believe it is usually unsafe, or




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
S 2837




































issues.













































2838 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL.



Discussion
always unsafe, to cycle". In this context, we       focused on the ways in which
see walking - a potentially highly sociable
participants travel, make transport decisions,
form of transport, which may account      attitudes towards different transport
hold for
to beand the reasons behind their travel
a substantial share of short journeys -modes
behaviour.
an appropriate research focus. Moreover, it   Initially, we held a pilot study,
has an established reputation as theconsisting
most      of graduate students at the
University
popular active leisure activity among New       of  Auckland. The pilot focus
Zealanders (SPARC, 2001).           group  yielded interesting data that were
Auckland has made some progress    subsequently
in       incorporated into the results
moving towards a more sustainable of  the study. Further focus groups were held
trans-
in three Auckland suburbs in order to en-
port system. For instance, following years
of floundering on the part of localsure
bodythat the narratives yielded spoke to
experience
politicians, the Britomart railway station was    in a diverse set of locations across
the metropolitan
finally completed in 2003, enabling trains to            area. Details on these focus

this including the characteristics of
groups,
converge within Auckland's CBD. Since
participants, are outlined in Table 1 .
date, there has been an improved level of
Focus groups were held in relaxed settings,
rail service. Additionally, a busway from the
with two groups conducted in a group mem-
North Shore to the central city has recently
ber s home, one in a local community centre
opened. Despite these invest-ments, indicators
and the other group (with students) in a fami-
reveal that Aucklanders are driving more than
liar space at the university. Transcripts were
ever before (Auckland Regional Council,
examined through a thematic analysis that
2005). Recent initiatives to promote walking
searched for difference as well as common-
(such as walking school bus programmes),
ality in participants' viewpoints. A range of
combined with rising fuel prices and growing
themes were identified and the transcript
congestion, suggest that walking may well be
text coded accordingly. At this time, all
seriously contemplated by larger sectors of
participants were given a pseudonym to
the population as a feasible transport mode
protect their anonymity.
in the future. An analysis of the position,
and perceptions, of walking and driving in
Results
Auckland is therefore timely.

Focus group discussions revealed that trans-
Method                                                  port decision-making in Auckland is a highly
complex process. Participants' perceptions
We explored experiences of travel behaviourof different modes were often plural or con-
in Auckland through a series of four focus
tradictory (they both liked and disliked the
groups. These were organised and conducteddifferent modes) and there was a very large
by the first author and involved adult partici-
range of factors which affected the ways in
pants from a range of ages and residential    which they travel.
locations. Because travel behaviour is generally
Driving
socially informed, and following recent
precedent (Guiver, 2007), we deemed focus
Our research revealed that the car is pervasive
groups to be an ideal vehicle for examining
in the lives of focus group participants. Almost
travel decision-making, the social meanings
all members held driving licences and had
access to a car. Many group members iden-
of different travel modes and the ways people
make sense of them in Auckland.                         tified the car as their main mode of transpor




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms






















































































t








EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIES 2841



social employ various coping and blaming
Importantly, parents also reported apeople
mechanisms to justify their own car use and to
pressure to walk more with their children
relieve their anxieties or guilt over the negative
CB : So is there a lot of pressure to drive your
environmental    and social effects of cars.
kids around?

Ambiguous Socialities of Driving
Andrea : There's actually, in this area, probably
more of a pressure to walk, because ... if I
Confirming many of the arguments in recent
drove my children to school ... people are sort
automobility literature, a large number of
of like, "Did you DRIVE?". You know, because
focus group participants identified that sig-
I live two streets away, and literally, even if it's
teeming with rain, like this morning, younificant parts of every day unfold in the car
know like we would still walk to school ...              and on the road or motorway. During this
Melissa : Same with me ...                               time, the 'non-place' of the motorway is over-
laid with the social and cultural meanings
Andrea : And if you sort of turn up to coffee which are constructed and attached to the
group or something like that and you know,
car itself. Car use in Auckland is often con-
you sort of feel a bit guilty for driving if you're
so close ...                                        structed as social and as a means of caring for
others (by driving them around, or visiting
(Focus group 3).
them). For instance, the following excerpt
This narrative suggests that some parents reveals how car use enables parents to allow
in Auckland feel guilt about consistently their children to pursue a number of cultural
chauffeuring their children and so endeav-or sporting activities
our to walk. In this context, good parenting'
Edward : Yes, we were a taxi. But we brought
may involve walking with children, where this
our kids up that way, we said to them,
is reasonably possible. Recent programmes particularly our daughter, we said to Jane,
aimed at increasing child pedestrian activity                anytime you want to come home, ring. But
in Auckland, such as walking school buses our daughter used to play hockey and my son
(see Collins and Kearns, 2005), have arguably                used to play soccer so we drove our daughter
contributed to encouraging such supervised to, dropped our daughter first and then our
walking.                                   son, then reverse ...
While the connection between car use                        Michael : Yeah, our children were like that
and contemporary sociality is perhaps best
too when they were growing up but that
was our fault more than theirs, because we
characterised as ambiguous, the negative
environmental consequences of the carencouraged
are        them to have as many interests
as possible.
more clear-cut. Some of our participants
its group 4).
did avoid driving due to concerns about(Focus
adverse environmental effects. The major-
Women especially stated that their cars en-
ity of participants endeavoured to reduce
them to go out and socialise after dark,
abledto
car use in some way, this being one way
which they would otherwise feel unsafe
appease feelings of guilt over the environ-
Not- Furthermore, many parents explained
mental effects of motorised transport. doing.
withstanding, some participants blamed that   their own car use enabled them to
others for environmental degradation     and more time with their children, or to
spend
did not really consider changing their    be-back' to them quickly after work or
tget
other engagements. In this way, car use is
haviours. This otherness' (pointing to other
users for damaging the environment)conceptualised
cor-            as highly social in Auckland
responds with Maxwells (2001) findingand    this results in particular meanings being
that




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms























































































2842 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL .



attached to the car, in which it is understood
this respect, the interests of transport planners
health
andsafety
as a facilitator of social life, as providing                                 professionals may converge
for oneself and others, and as a resource  used
around  the promotion of active transport
to care for others.                   (for example, Cavili, 2001; Frank and Engelke,
2001;
In addition, the sociality of cars was    Lumsdon and Mitchell, 1999).
high-
focus these positive constructions of
lighted by participants of the studentDespite
walking, many barriers to walking were
group, who discussed the cultural phenom-
enon of the 'road trip'. For them, "the   drive These were largely predictable and
identified.
[onthe fact that automobile-dominated
included
is almost as good as actually being there
environments were unpleasant for pedes-
holiday] ", because of their social interaction
in the car. The car enables these people   not fear of reckless driving, accidents
trians, given
only the freedom to go on holiday, but  also Parents of young children repeat-
and crime.
to spend time with their friends.  edly identified that they did not feel safe
allowing their children to have free reign in
Walking                                                     public space due to fear of traffic accidents
Somewhat surprisingly, given the strength                   and of abduction or assault. However, this did

of commonly accepted narratives portray-                    not prevent parents from walking with their
children to school or other activities.
ing the Auckland urban environment as
hostile to alternatives to car dependence,                     Furthermore, walking was acknowledged
many respondents articulated positive                       to be underutilised due to poor public
views of walking. Recreational walking was                  transport services in Auckland, which meant
said to be facilitated by the region's ex-                  that walking and public transport could not
tensive networks of parks, reserves, beaches                be easily or flexibly combined. Participants
also stated that their level of car use was muc
and relatively green' suburban areas. Walk-
ing for transport was valued in interesting                 higher than it might have been, had public
and highly detailed or varied urban envir-                  transport been better able to meet their
onments, where shops and/or employment                      needs. Consequently, they were likely to drive
were reasonably accessible to many on foot.                 habitually rather than consider other options.
The latter observation aligns with recent
international literature which has identified               Sociality of Walking
that high-density, mixed-use urban envir-                   While car use has been shown here to be
onments are more conducive to walking                       experienced as a form of social practice, parti
for transport purposes (for example, Badoe                  cipants within every focus group indicated
and Miller, 2000; Ewing and Cervero, 2001;                  that they enjoyed walking because it gave
Frank et al , 2001). Participants also stressed             them a chance either to interact with the
(repeatedly) that health concerns motivate                  others they walk with, or to see other people
them to walk more.                                          (acquaintances and strangers) along the
Interestingly, all focus group members                    way. While contemporary patterns of urban
viewed walking as important, notwith-                       social life are highly auto-oriented (Sheller
standing their varying ages and locations                   and Urry, 2000; Urry, 2004), walking con-
(see Table 1). Walking, therefore, presents an              tinues to facilitate social interaction among
ideal tool not only for encouraging healthier               friends, strangers and casual acquaintances.
lifestyles, but also for improving the broader              The following focus group extract illustrates
health of urban areas by reducing the negative              how students find walking to be a highly
environmental effects of automobile use. In                 social activity




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms











































h








-





















EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIES 2843



home
Jeremy : I can't even imagine walkingthose which have a higher level of street life,
from the city at, like, five in the morning after
are actually more social places (for example,
a big night, even living in the city, or near the et al y 2007). This idea was also dir-
du Toit
city, which I do.
ectly articulated by a participant
Matthew : Do you get too [drunk]?
Rebecca: I like walking where there are other
Jeremy : No, I just, it seems like a weird thing
to have to do.                             people out, I think that pedestrians encourage
pedestrians and that's my experience, so that's
Elle : No, it's great, you walk with your mates            why it'd be fun walking through Kingsland,
and ...
'cos there's people on the footpath having
Matthew : It's awesome!                                    their cappuccinos and that's quite lovely. And
Peter : Yeah!
I love walking through our neighbourhood in
the morning with the kids 'cos there's actually
Elle: You have great conversations and you                 lots of people out walking and I have so many
sober up on the way and you don't feel ill                 conversations with other kids and neighbours
when you get home, and you get fresh air ...               on the way to school and so, for me, it's about
Matthew : Cold air's awesome ...                           people being out encouraging me to be out
really.
Tristan : and you get sober ...
Matthew : Yeah.                                            (Focus group 2)

Jeremy: Maybe I'll try and let you know.                 From this type of statement, it is clear that
Samantha: And you don't realise how far walking is perceived to be very social, presum-
you've walked.                          ably because people are moving at a pace
Elle: No, I know, you can walk for two hours             that enables them to speak to one another, in
and not even realise. Best exercise.                     contrast to the confinement of the car which

Peter: I've had the best times of my life actually,
prevents them from seeing and conversing
with others.
being drunk and walking with friends.
Parents stressed the importance of walk-
Elle: Yup.
ing with their children to school, partially
Matthew: Yup.
because of 'peer pressure' from other parents
Tristan: Okay, alone, it's just a pain in the            to drive less, but also due to the time they
ass.
were able to spend with their children on the
Peter: Alone, yeah.           way. While literature on automobility has
(Focus group 1).              highlighted the ways in which the spatio-
temporalities of parenting are becoming
Other focus group members used more      as this finding suggests that
complex,
walking
'mobile
a primary means of socialising with      parenting' is also experienced locally
friends
and whileand
who live in their neighbourhoods     walking. While, on the one hand,
parenting
considered their neighbourhood walks          is being stretched across time and
to be
space,
a fundamental part of their social life.  on the  other, there is a move towards
Discussion highlighted the ways  in which
resisting this by walking to local activities.
street another focus group high-
Furthermore,
the presence of some people on the
lighted
can encourage others to step out into     the importance of walkable environ-
public
socialby
space, thereby giving the street a ments    anddrawing a comparison between
convivial atmosphere. This confirms       many
European  streets that encourage both walking
and social interaction, and the main streets
of the claims in academic literature which
of Auckland
state that walkable neighbourhoods, and




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


























































































2844 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL.



discussed earlier, participants also felt a
Edward : One thing I miss that I thoroughly
Europe,
enjoyed, my family when we lived indeeper connection with areas or places when
Adriatic
we used to go down on holidays to the walking, as opposed to driving, through them.
Sea in Yugoslavia. And all of those towns have
One participant felt that walking offered a
big boulevards and come after hours, after
heightened level of sensory perception
work, five o'clock or so, or six o'clock, people
used to, there used to be about 50 people
Holly : And there's another layer to walking,
across, walking, and they sat down andandthey
that is you experience a bit more, rather
thanand
play a game of chess ... on the sidewalk   doing stuff in the car ... Because when
there was a tremendous social atmosphere
you're walking you feel the air, you smell, you
there. It's starting here in places ...    hear things, it's just totally different and if
you're in a good place it's nice.
Michael : The village up here actually, Howiek
well.group 1)
village is actually just starting that very (Focus

Edward : Yes, but that was tremendous.
The familiarity and personal connection to
place that can accrue from walking a par-
Phillip : And you see that a lot in Europe?
ticular route were also apparent
Edward: Yes, you see that a lot in Europe,
but I mean, you don't have the big sidewalks
Anthony : And it's just the connection, I mean,
[here].                                  you were talking about the route you follow
(Focus group 4).                         down New North Road. That's not particularly
picturesque or anything, but I don't know
Walking is a highly social activity because about how you see it but [when you walk] you
it allows interaction with strangers (as in get a connection where you just see so much
and somehow it becomes more your space,
the examples from Europe and Howiek), as
you know, so that corridor that you walked,
well as with other neighbourhood residents
suddenly, you know, it's part of your space.
and acquaintances. Walking also provides
But if you're just driving through it, well.
opportunities for friends (or family) to
(Focus group 2).
interact when they walk together, as in the
earlier case of students walking home from                  This participant claimed to appropriate space
a night out.                                                through walking; driving did not provide
him with the same sense of (non-exclusive)
Perception of Place and Embodiment                          ownership. Indeed, each of the foregoing
in the City
quotes suggests that walking facilitates deep
The embodied experiences of walking and                     place bonds. These experiences are broadly
driving articulated by focus group partici-                 consistent with claims that highly walked
pants were linked to constructions and                      areas tend to be Authentic', as walking faci-
conceptions of 'walking places' and 'driving                litates the creation of meaningful ties to pla
places'. Walking places were perceived to be                (Amato, 2004; Macauley, 2000).
local, safe, aesthetically pleasing and separ-                 One participant reflected on a walked
ated from busy traffic. Accordingly, they were              journey to work along a major Auckland
vital and social places. While recent scholar-              thoroughfare, Dominion Road. This is
ship on automobility has argued that every-                 largely a vibrant and pedestrian-friendly
day lived experiences are increasingly situated             thoroughfare but, as it reaches the city centr
in the car (for example, Urry, 2004), our study             it becomes more industrial and crosses over

found that walking and walkable places                      a major motorway junction. The contrast
were often perceived to be central to daily                 between the 'walking' and 'driving' places
life. Echoing the observations of de Certeau,               along this road were stark.




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms





























































ce





e,













EXPLORING SOCIAL MOBILITIES 28



Bridget : I used to really enjoy walking   on such that they are understood as
relations
place,to people s lives. This situation results
Dominion Road 'cos it's an interestingcentral
there's lots of really interesting shops,inthere's
particular meanings being attached to the
lots of really interesting people there, and I did
car, in which it is understood as a facilitator
used to walk to work or varsity, even though
of social life, as providing safety for
the top end of the walk was really grotty and
and others, and as a resource used to care for
it was through an industrial area, and through
others.
the motorway and stuff like that, but still ... I
used to enjoy the first half of it a lot.   However, car use is more socially ambi-
guous than it appears at first glance: there
(Focus group 2).
was also a keen awareness of - and sharp
This participant feels a certain connectiondistaste for - many of the car's negative
with the walkable environment on her route consequences. Parents of young children, in
to work, but the "grotty" motorway holdsparticular, spoke of a tension between relying
no such meaning for her. This is in line with on the automobile to fulfil caring roles and
research contending that 'driving places' are promoting active travel for children. Accord-
often experienced as 'non-places' (see Arefi,ingly, walking is a highly favoured activity
2004; Augé, 1995; Bull, 2004; Relph, 1976). for local trips, especially to and from primary
schools, as well as for recreation and exercise.
However, there are many spaces in which
Conclusion
walking is an abnormal activity, as well as
being inconvenient, unsafe and unpleasant.
In the course of reviewing a range of studies,
we have built an argument that walking    The imperative of encouraging exercise for
and driving cannot be understood simply   children, combined with safety concerns,
as behaviours facilitated or inhibited bycreates a local culture in which 'good parent-
ing' involves walking with children, where
urban form. Rather, they are mobilities with
deep-seated social meanings. Our study's     this is reasonably possible. Follow-up
contribution involved an attentiveness to    research might consider how households'
discourse and what it can reveal about the   social practices change over time: does, for
complex social character of transport optionsinstance, a commitment to walking among
and experiences in an automobilised urbanprimary school pupils and their parents
centre. The foregoing focus group datastructure mobility practices and preferences
later in life?
revealed distinctive narratives of walking
and driving in Auckland; while the car is In Auckland, current transport policy and
dominant, people continue to walk and attach investment indicate that, while the total
strongly held social values to that practice.number of automobile trips will continue
Future exploration of these values could to rise, the car's modal share will decline
usefully consider whether they vary according(Auckland Regional Council, 2005). More
to neighbourhood socioeconomic status, asfundamental change in Auckland's trans-
more deprived areas may be less predisposed port system will require additional measures
to discretionary walking (see, for example,to mitigate the social embeddedness of the
Witten et al , 2003).                      automobile. 'Alternative' transport would
The car is clearly woven deeply into theneed to align with family patterns and ways
sociality of Auckland life. Many of our par- of caring for one another. It would also need
ticipants could not imagine their lives with- to be socially (re) constructed as a plausible,
out access to a car and used them habitually. 'normal' option, rather than as 'alternative' in
Cars are also embedded in social and familial           the sense of different or unusual.




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
45












oneself

























































2846 CATHERINE E. BEAN ETAL



Social marketing campaigns may Beckmann,
play a    J. (2001) Automobility: a social
of and theoretical concept, Environment
problem
role in this. Indeed, the incorporation
stories such as those revealed by our partici-  and Planning D, 19, pp. 593-607.
Black, C., Collins, A. and Snell, M. (2001)
pants could serve to put a human face on the
Encouraging walking: the case of journey-to-
challenge of renormalising walking                 as a
school trips in compact urban areas, Urban
form of everyday mobility. In particular,       Studies , 38, pp. 1121-1141.
perceptions that walking is a healthy              and R. (2002) Auto Mobile: How the Car
Brandon,
social travel mode that facilitates local and   Changed Life. London: Macmillan.
Bull, M. (2004) Automobility and the power
community interaction can be built upon.
While first-person accounts can be powerful                 of sound, Theory Culture & Society , 21, pp.
243-259.
tools in social marketing, we acknowledge
Cavili, N. (2001) Walking and health: making
that long-term investment in public transport
the links, World Transport Policy and Practice
will also be necessary in the promotion of a
7, pp. 33-38.
more sustainable city.                                  Certeau, M. de (1984) The Practice of Everyday
Life , transi. S. Rendali. Berkeley, CA: Univers
of California Press.
References
Collins, D. C. A. and Kearns, R. A. (2001) The
Amato, J. A. (2004) On Foot: A History of Walking. safe journeys of an enterprising school: negoti-
New York: New York University Press.             ating landscapes of opportunity and risk,
Appleyard, D. and Lintell, M. (1972) The envir- Health and Place , 7, pp. 293-306.
Collins, D. C. A. and Kearns, R. A. (2005)
onmental quality of city streets: the residents'
viewpoint, Journal of the American Institute of Geographies of inequality: child pedestrian
Planners , 38, pp. 84-101.                       injury and walking school buses in Auckland,
Arefi, M. (2004) The pedagogy of the American New Zealand, Social Science & Medicine , 60,
city: revisiting the concepts of place, non- pp. 61-69.
place, and placelessness, Urban Design Inter- Dant, T. and Martin, P. J. (2001) By car: carrying
national , 9(3), pp. 103-117.                    modern society, in: J. Gronow and A. Warde
Auckland Regional Council (2005) Moving (Eds) Ordinary Consumption , pp. 143-157.
forward: Auckland regional land transport London: Routledge.
strategy 2005. Auckland Regional Council. Dowling, R. (2000) Cultures of mothering and
Auckland Regional Planning Authority (1955) car use in suburban Sydney: a preliminary
Master transportation plan for metropolitan investigation, Geoforum , 31, pp. 345-353.
Auckland. Auckland Regional PlanningEwing, R. and Cervero, R. (2001) Travel and the
Authority.                                               built environment: a synthesis, Transportation
Auckland Regional Transport Authority (2007) Research Record , 1780, pp. 87-114.
Sustainable transport plan 2006-16. Auckland     Falconer, R. and Ringham, S. (2007) A geography
Regional Transport Authority.                       of 'boy racers' in Christchurch, New Zealand,
Augé, M. (1995) Non-places: Introduction to an New Zealand Geographer , 63, pp. 181-191.
Anthropology of Supermodernity , transi. J. Howe.Feyer, A. and Langley, J. D. (2000) Unintentional
London: Verso.                                      injury in New Zealand: priorities and future
Badoe, D. A. and Miller, E. J. (2000) Transportation- directions, Journal of Safety Research , 31,
land-use interaction: empirical findings in pp. 109-134.
North America, and their implications for        Fisher, G. W., Rolfe, K. A., Kjellstrom, T. et al.
modeling, Transportation Research Part D , 5, (2002) Health Effects Due to Motor Vehicle
pp. 235-263.                                        Air Pollution in New Zealand. Wellington:
Banister, D. and Bowling, A. (2004) Quality of Ministry of Transport.
life for the elderly: the transport dimension,   Frank, L. D. and Engelke, P. O. (2001) The built
Transport Policy, 11, pp. 105-115.                  environment and human activity patterns:
Baudrillard, J. (1988) America. New York: Verso. exploring the impacts of urban form on public




This content downloaded from
130.113.111.210 on Tue, 06 Apr 2021 16:37:57 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


























,



ity











































