

Original Article
Using GIS to analyze the role of barriers and facilitators
to walking in children’s travel to school

Ilir Bejleri*, Ruth L. Steiner, Allison Fischman and Jeffrey M. Schmucker

Department of Urban and Regional Planning, University of Florida, PO Box 115706, Gainesville,
Florida 32611-5706, USA.
E-mails: ilir@ufl.edu, rsteiner@dcp.ufl.edu; fischman@dcp.ufl.edu; jms2004@ufl.edu
*Corresponding author.


Abstract Extensive research in response to the decline of walkability in the past 30 years has identified a
multitude of factors that affect children’s ability to work or bicycle to school. Among others, urban form – the layout
and configurations of urban blocks and street networks - can constraint or facilitate pedestrian travel to a destination
such as a school. Although contemporary research uses approximate measures of walkability such as straight-line
distance between origin and destination, or even measures of distances along roadway networks, the presence of
physical barriers and facilitators to walking calls for a more accurate method for assessing walkability as a function
of distance dictated by constraints of urban form. Modern technologies like Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
offer capabilities to enable calculation of such measures. This article presents a GIS methodology that analyzes
children travel to school as a function of distance along the network and the role of barriers and facilitators that
impact the path and the accessibility to school. The study is conducted in 32 randomly selected elementary schools
in four Florida counties. Three pedestrian sheds of 1/2 mile (10 minutes walk) are generated around each school
based respectively on (a) straight-line distance, (b) roadway network distance and (c) pedestrian network distance
adjusted for barriers such as major roads, and lack of sidewalks and facilitators such as pedestrian paths, crossing
guards and rear entrances to school. The pedestrian sheds are compared based on two measures: (1) pedestrian
route directness (PRD) – an index that measures urban form permeability and connectivity and (2) the student count
in each shed – a measure that indicates how effectively the pedestrian shed captures potential students along these
networks. Results show that the pedestrian shed decreases in size upon considering network distance over straight-
line distance, and readjusts upon consideration of barriers and facilitators. PRD values decrease as the pedestrian
shed is adjusted which indicates shorter, more direct paths to schools are available. Findings suggest that inclusion
of barriers and facilitators when measuring distance along the network offers a more realistic version of the true
distance a child could potentially walk to school. The study found that barriers and facilitators play critical roles in
how the urban landscape can be traversed and, in turn, greatly affect walkability and accessibility to school. Barriers
can reduce walkability and accessibility to school whereas facilitators can increase the permeability and connectivity
of pedestrian networks. In addition to improving walkability measurement methods by enhancing the GIS network
analysis to include barriers and facilitators, this research has broader implications for the study of walkability as it
relates to urban form. The findings can be used by local governments to develop better policies to promote close
coordination of school siting with residential development and transportation. These findings can also inform the
urban design of the layout and configuration of street networks, urban blocks and placement of buildings to support
safe pedestrian circulation with good permeability connectivity and accessibility throughout the neighborhood.
Especially, findings from this study emphasize the importance of designing for connected pedestrian paths that
minimize barriers and maximize facilitators.
URBAN DESIGN International (2011) 16, 51–62. doi:10.1057/udi.2010.18; published online 18 August 2010

Keywords: active travel; walkability; urban form; GIS; network distance



Introduction                                                     of company, commerce and mutual defense
(Frumkin et al, 2004). With the advent of the
Cities have historically been recognized as places               automobile, however, the focus on connecting
for people to come together to enjoy the benefits                people with places has progressively diminished.

r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317 URBAN DESIGN International   Vol. 16, 1, 51–62
www.palgrave-journals.com/udi/

























































Bejleri et al



Places that once provided safe and equitable
travel by foot are now dominated by disconnected
land uses and hazardous travel conditions. The
urban landscape is threatened by ever-encroaching
suburbia, an environment well-suited to the
automobile. For the pedestrian, the typical sub-
urban environment severely limits accessibility,
making it difficult to get from place to place
on foot.
One manifestation of such difficulty is an
increasingly overweight American population,
including children and adolescents. Overweight
and obesity are particularly risky for children and
adolescents as they may experience immediate
health consequences with a greater risk for
weight-related health problems later in adulthood
(Serdula et al, 1993), including cardiovascular
disease, diabetes (Fagot-Campagna et al, 2000;
Hannon et al, 2005), psychosocial illnesses (Dietz,
1998; Strauss et al, 2001) and a host of other
chronic disorders. One solution is to increase the
amount of physical activity in which children
participate. Walking to school represents an
opportunity for children to engage in physical
activity, an opportunity fewer and fewer children
have participated in over the past half-century. In
2003, the US Environmental Protection Agency
reported a decline in the number of students who
walked and bicycled to school from 48 per cent in
1969 to 15 per cent in 2001 (Ewing and Greene,
2003). This trend was also projected in a ‘Home-
to-School Transportation’ study conducted by the
Florida Department of Transportation in 1992 that
estimated that only one out of six children in
Florida walk or bicycle to school while the rest are
transported by bus or private motor vehicle
(Starnes et al, 1992).
The decline in walkability generally, and in
children’s travel to school specifically, has prom-
pted extensive research around the world to
understand and address it. Such research has
indentified a multitude of factors that affect
children’s ability to walk to school, including
physical characteristics of urban built environ-
ment. One of the many factors affecting walk-
ability that is related to the physical built
environment is the travel distance. The travel
distance is commonly measured by using
straight-line distance between origin and destina-
tions. Although this measurement method has
its applicability, there is a need to use proper
measures of walking distance that reflect physical
arrangements of built environment. In reality,
travel distance is a function of travel paths which

52                   r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.




in turn are dictated by urban form. The config-
uration and layout of urban landscape – consist-
ing mainly of urban blocks, and the street
network – does constraint accessibility to a desti-
nation such as a school. Permeability of urban
form and street layout and connectivity can
reduce or increase the opportunities for pedes-
trian travel to such destinations. Therefore, for a
more accurate assessment of walkability, it is
important to measure the more accurate distance
traveled along the network while accounting for
barriers and facilitators of pedestrian travel.
Modern technologies like geographic information
systems (GIS) offer capabilities to enable calcula-
tion of such measures.
This article presents a GIS methodology that
analyzes children travel to school as a function
of the distance along the network and the role of
barriers and facilitators that impact the distance
and the accessibility to school. Although the study
is focused on travel to school, the methodology
and the findings have broader implications for
walkability research as it relates to urban form.
It is recognized that the distance is not the only
factor that affect walkability. A review of addi-
tional factors is presented below; however,
they are not implemented in the scope of this
particular study.


Background

Physical inactivity has been found to have
deleterious effects on the health of children and
adolescents (Slater et al, 2008). Many children do
not engage in enough physical activity to meet
the recommendations required to maintain a
healthy weight that supports healthy lifestyles
(Dellinger and Staunton, 2002). Understanding
physical activity behaviors among children and
adolescents is complex. Sallis et al (2000) reveal
that there are a multitude of factors that can
influence physical activity behaviors among
children and adolescents such as sex differences
(male or female), parental overweight status,
previous physical activity and perceived activity
competence to name a few. Additionally, some
children lack physical activity because of parental
perceptions concerning safety of the outdoor
environment (Valentine and McKendrick, 1997).
Children are spending more time indoors, parti-
cipating in less-physically active alternatives,
such as watching television and playing video-
games (Robinson, 1999). Furthermore, studies

1357-5317   URBAN DESIGN International   Vol. 16, 1, 51–62





show that more and more children are being
driven to school than ever before, negating the
opportunities for them to be physically active
(Freeman and Quigg, 2009). One of many recom-
mended solutions to help reduce the prevalence
of childhood obesity is to increase opportunities
for children to walk or bicycle to school. Walking
and bicycling to school are utilitarian travel
opportunities that provide underlying physical
activity for children (Ziviani et al, 2004).
Because streets accommodate most forms of
travel, their importance serves as a central focus
in understanding patterns of walkability. Tradi-
tionally, in the United States, streets were laid in
gridiron patterns. However, over time the grid
pattern became more chaotic consisting of ‘loops
and lollipops’, subsequently converting straight-
line distances into journeys of considerable length
(Southworth and Owens, 1993; Southworth and
Ben-Joseph, 2003). The circuitous nature of loop-
ing roadways was strategically aimed at reducing
the number of automobile thorough-fares,
focused on making residential streets safer for
the pedestrian. Conventional street designs have
had adverse affects resulting in reduced connec-
tivity, an increase in vehicle miles traveled,
increased traffic conditions, and a host of other
public nuisances and health-related issues
(Frumkin et al, 2004). For many of these reasons,
walking and bicycling to school are not always
feasible or attractive options for many families.
Decisions concerning children’s travel to school
are contingent upon many factors. Physical-
environmental factors influencing decisions in-
clude proximity (or distance between home and
school) and presence and condition of sidewalks
and pathways. Additional factors that also play
critical roles include neighborhood and traffic
safety, socio-demographics, household transpor-
tation options, social/cultural norms, policies,
and parental attitudes and personal choice
(McMillan, 2006; Kerr et al, 2006; Ridgewell et al,
2009). Safety concerns or the lack of sense of
security play substantial roles in the decision
process. These include social-environmental
influences, such as real and perceived crime and
other undesirable activities like the presence of
drug dealers, bullies, and of recent the perception
of pedophiles (Tewksbury and Mustaine, 2006).
Gender differences may also play a role. One
study shows that boys are more likely to be
allowed to walk or bicycle to school than are girls
(McMillan et al, 2006). Ultimately parents make
the decision on whether or not a child is allowed

r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317
The role of barriers and facilitators to walking



to walk or bicycle to school. Interestingly, children
sometimes garner a different perception of the
environment between home and school and if
given the opportunity would rather walk or
bicycle to school (Mitchell et al, 2007).
Although the literature conveys the psycholo-
gical influences to walking (Ziviani et al, 2006),
it also identifies methods of encouraging children
to actively travel to school, through programs
like Federal Safe Routes to Schools (FHWA, 2010),
CDC’s KidsWalk-to-School,1 and walking school
buses2 (Collins and Kearns, 2005). These pro-
grams are designed to encourage children to
engage in active travel to school and can help
develop environments that are safer for children
while building a stronger sense of community
(Tranter and Pawson, 2001). However, many pro-
grams and initiatives focus only on safety rather
than distance as a primary barrier to walking to
school (McDonald, 2007). Distance between the
school and residence is one of the important
factors for a child who either walks him/herself
to school or is escorted by a parent.


Measures of urban form impacting walkability

One determinant of travel through urban space is
physical proximity. The literature shows that on
average, an acceptable distance for pedestrian
and transit-friendly travel can be distinguished
by a 5- to (maximum) 10-min walk, which is
approximately one-quarter to one-half of a mile
(Ewing, 1999). Understanding distance as one of
the determinants in travel behaviors is vitally
important, especially in addressing opportunities
for children to actively travel to school. Schlossberg
et al (2006) conducted a study to understand
urban form and children’s travel to school and
found that the farther a child lived from a school,
the less likely he or she was to walk or bicycle
there. However, the findings also revealed there
are circumstances that students are willing to
walk at distances greater than the expected
(Schlossberg et al, 2006). Another study found
similar results of increased numbers of students
walking or bicycling from school to home, with
positive associations linked to several environ-
mental factors including higher land use mix, the
presence of street trees and shorter trip length
(Larsen et al, 2009). Although distance – as a
surrogate in understanding the impacts of urban
form on walkability – is a primary focus in this
article, it is recognized that it is not the sole factor

URBAN DESIGN International    Vol. 16, 1, 51–62                     53

Bejleri et al



influencing children’s mode choice in travelling                        route directness (PRD) (Dill, 2004). PRD is the
to school.                                                              ratio of the network distance to the straight line.
There are two groups of measures of pedestrian                       A ratio approaching a value of one signifies that
travel in the context of the physical environment:                      the distance travelled along the roadway network
general walkability and origin-destination walk-                        approximates the straight-line distance, indicating
ability. General walkability measures are used to                       a more direct route. A ratio of 1.2 indicates that
characterize urban form of neighborhoods by a set                       the distance travelled along the roadway network
of indices computed based on physical character-                        is 20 per cent longer than the straight-line distance
istics such as for instance urban block length and                      from origin to destination.
size. Smaller block sizes or shorter block lengths                         Another measure related to the origin-destination
indicate better connectivity or greater potential                       walkability is residential density. Concentrations
for movement through space (Dill, 2004). Another                        of residential dwellings in proximity to desired
measure is street and intersection density. A                           locations provide an indication of the potential
greater number of streets or intersections within                       for individuals to travel between home and a
an area would mean greater connectivity yielding                        destination. This is particularly useful in evaluat-
a higher rate of walkability (Frank et al, 2005).                       ing home-to-school connections (City of Raleigh,
One of the limitations of calculating walkability                       North Carolina, 2008). See Table 1 for a summary
using these types of measures is that they are                          of the common measures of walkability presented
not destination driven. They provide generalized                        here. For more detail description of these and
approximations of walkability and are used to                           additional measures of walkability, see Dill (2004).
rank geographic areas (neighborhoods or com-                               In origin-destination measures of walkability,
munities) on the walkability potential.                                 such as children’s travel between home and
The second group of measures concentrates on                         school, careful consideration should be given to
origin-destination walkability. They focus on                           the components of the urban form that can further
measuring the walkable distance in a straight                           reduce or enhance opportunities for safe pedes-
line between the origin and destination or along                        trian travel. Common barriers that may reduce
the walkable network. Measuring the distance                            walkability between home and school could
between two points along a network provides                             include hazardous walking conditions like in-
a more accurate assessment of walkability.                              adequate sidewalks, high speed and volume of
A common measure in this category is pedestrian                         traffic, fences or walls, and the absence of crossing


Table 1: Common measures of walkability

Measure                      Description                                                    Ideal values

Block length                 Blocks are the land area carved out by the street              300 to 600 feet (Dill, 2004)
network. It is presumed that shorter the block, the
greater amount of connectivity

Block size                   Measured by the length and the width, blocks that are          Fort Collins, Colorado requires block
smaller in total size presumably infer better                  sizes to be between 7 and 12 acres
connectivity                                                   (Steiner et al, 2006)

Street density               The total linear miles (or kilometers) of streets per unit     Not identified
of area (usually in square miles or kilometers)

Intersection density         The number of intersections per unit of area (usually          Over 78 intersections per square mile
in square miles or kilometers). It is presumed that            (Frank et al, 2005)
higher density equates to higher connectivity

Pedestrian route             The ratio of network distance to straight-line distance        Values between 1.2 and 1.5 have been
directness (PRD)             for two selected points. Numbers closer to one may             recommended as acceptable
represent better connectivity                                  standards (Dill, 2004)

Residential density          The total number of dwelling units (or parcels) per            Schools located in neighborhoods
unit of area (usually in square miles or kilometers)           containing 5 dwelling units per acre
(City of Raleigh, NC, 2008)



54                     r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317   URBAN DESIGN International   Vol. 16, 1, 51–62







































































guards3 to facilitate the safe crossing of the
street (Dellinger and Staunton, 2002). In contrast,
facilitators that can enhance opportunities for
walking could include trails and other informal
pathways, rear entrances to school grounds and
the employment of crossing guards at hazardous
street intersections.
In summary, there are many measures that can
be used to analyze walking environments. To this
end, it is important to note that there is no single,
all-purpose measure that can tell the entire story.



Using GIS to measure walkability

GIS is essential in better understanding the
complexities of the pedestrian travel environ-
ment. Although a straight-line distance between
two points can be measured easily, the measure-
ment of distances along a network is much more
complex. GIS has the capability to assist in
development of such measures using a tool called
network analysis. Given an origin (for example,
location of a student residence) and a destination
(for example, location of a school), GIS can
determine the shortest path between these two
points along the street network and it can
compute the distance of that path. In addition,
using network analysis tools, GIS can determine a
catchment area that includes all the residential
parcels that are within a certain network distance
from the school. Both the shortest path and the
catchment areas are spatial complex calculations
that can be easily computed in GIS.
A critical factor in measuring walkability when
considering distances along a network is the role
of barriers and facilitators. Network distance can
be calculated along the street network; however,
children may take a shorter distance to school if
they can take an informal path or they can cross a
major roadway with the assistance of a crossing
guard. The school can reduce the distance that
some children travel to school by allowing access
to the school in locations closer to residences. By
taking into account these factors, GIS can modify
the shortest paths and the catchment areas,
provided that the GIS street network is adjusted
to reflect the presence or absence of these barriers
and facilitators.
This research makes extensive use of GIS
network analysis to develop measures of chil-
dren’s travel to school in the presence of barriers
and facilitators.

r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317
The role of barriers and facilitators to walking



Method

The intent of this study is to examine the role that
barriers and facilitators play in children’s travel to
school. The study takes a cross-sectional research
approach and uses case studies of elementary
schools in four central Florida school districts4
in the Tampa Bay and Orlando areas. These
school districts – Orange, Seminole, Pasco and
Hillsborough – were chosen because they have
large populations (4400 000 in 2006), high rates
of enrollment (430 000 in 2005–2006 with 420
per cent student enrollment growth from 2000 to
2005), and contain at least 30 elementary schools
representing a range of time periods in which
schools were constructed.
Thirty-two randomly selected elementary
schools were chosen. The general study boundary
around each of these schools used for data
collection was determined by a combination of a
two-miles buffer area around each school and the
School Attendance Zones (SAZs). The areas out-
side the two-mile buffer are excluded from the
study because the State of Florida provides
funding for school districts to bus children who
live more than two miles from the school. The
two-mile general area is further constraints by
SAZs which are legislative boundaries established
to determine which children are assigned to a
specific school. The SAZs vary in size and shape
across the school district depending upon the
density of children in the residential neighbor-
hood surrounding each school. For schools that
are located outside of the center of their SAZ,
this boundary may present a barrier to children
walking because children may go to a school that
is a greater distance from their home to which
they may not be willing to walk or bicycle.


Data compilation

Data were collected, compiled and analyzed
using GIS, interviews with school principals or
their designees and field work.
GIS data layers assembled for this study
include high resolution aerial photographs, school
attendance boundaries, school point locations,
roadway network, property parcels and de-
identified5 student residential locations. These
data were obtained from various sources includ-
ing the Florida Geographic Data Library, Florida
county property appraiser’s offices, the Florida
Department of Revenue and four school districts.

URBAN DESIGN International    Vol. 16, 1, 51–62                     55

Bejleri et al



The location of hazardous walking conditions was
mapped in GIS using a list provided by the
Florida Department of Education. The student
residential location was originally mapped using
GIS geocoding that converts home addresses to
GIS point locations.
Interviews were conducted at all of the selected
schools. Each principal, or their designee were
asked about how students traveled to and from
school, safety risks for students who choose to
walk or bicycle to school, locations of crossing
guards, and access control points around the school
site. School officials also identified both formal and
informal access points onto school grounds.
Field audit was performed on the school site
and in the neighborhood. Using the aerial photo-
graphy and the information gathered in the
interviews, the locations of access points to the
school site were mapped. Formal and informal
off-road paths to school connected to the access
points were also mapped. These paths were
followed until they entered a neighborhood or
were at least one-mile walking distance from the
school’s access points. Additional data collected
through field audits included locations of crossing
guards and sidewalks. A pedestrian network
including location of barriers and facilitators
was created and the GIS base layer was updated
based on the field observations. All field data
were mapped digitally and were added to the
GIS database for further analyses.

Focus analysis areas and measures

The analysis was focused within areas located
one-half mile around each school site. This




Figure 1: Generation of pedestrian sheds.


56                    r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.




distance corresponds to a maximum 10-min walk
based on the literature referenced previously in
this article. This distance represents a reasonable
trip-length for most students to walk to elemen-
tary schools.
Using this distance, the neighborhoods around
each school were analyzed based on three
potential walkability areas generated using GIS.
These areas hereafter are referred to as ‘pedestrian
sheds’ and are labeled by numerals 1, 2 and 3
(Figure 1). The first shed, referred as ‘potential
walkability’, was generated by creating one-half
mile buffers around each elementary school using
a straight-line distance. This area of walkability
provides only a generalized approximation for
potential walkability, while ignoring all other
factors. The buffers were created using GIS
standard buffering tools. The second shed,
‘potential walkability adjusted to network dis-
tance’, depicts the one-half mile pedestrian shed
as measured along the roadway network. The
third shed, ‘potential walkability adjusted for
barriers and facilitators’, depicts the one-half
mile pedestrian shed distance as measured along
the network and adjusted based on the presence
of barriers and facilitators to walking in the
32 randomly selected elementary schools. Both
sheds 2 and 3 were generated using GIS network
analysis tools that have capabilities to create
catchment or ‘service’ areas for a given destina-
tion (the school) based on the desired distance
from the destination along a linear network.
Finally, all three sheds were further adjusted by
the SAZ boundaries that would reduce the size
of each shed for those schools located close to the
edges of the zone.







1357-5317   URBAN DESIGN International   Vol. 16, 1, 51–62

The role of barriers and facilitators to walking



In Figure 1, which conceptually illustrates the                          Tampa Bay area counties – Hillsborough and
generation of the pedestrian sheds, it may be                               Pasco Counties have lower student counts. In all
noted that the shed in image 2 is smaller than                              but Hillsborough County, the student count
the shed in image 3. This is because of poor                                increases upon adjusting the network pedestrian
connectivity of the roadway network that has not                            shed to account for barriers and facilitators to
been adjusted by any facilitators. In image 3, the                          walking. The increased student count suggests
dashed line inside the dark area shows the                                  that for schools in these counties, facilitators are
pedestrian pathways (facilitators) which expand                             in place to enhance the pedestrian environment.
the connected pedestrian network. The case of                               This is particularly true of Seminole County,
shed adjustment (potential reduction) from bar-                             which shows the highest rate of increase and
riers to walkability is not illustrated in this figure;                     has back entrances to schools that connect to
however, one of the cases in the article illustrates                        the surrounding cul-de-sac neighborhoods. In
this situation.                                                             contrast, in Hillsborough County, the drop of
Two measures – PRD and student count – are                               student counts in the pedestrian shed, which
the focus of the analysis within these pedestrian                           includes barriers and facilitators (shed #3), com-
sheds. An examination of PRD for a pedestrian                               pared to the network distance shed (shed #2)
shed can shed light on the configuration and                                indicates that the pedestrian network shed has
characteristics of the roadway network and other                            more barriers and hazardous walking conditions
formal and informal pathways. Student count,                                than the other three counties.
a measure of the number of students residing                                   Overall, the data summarized in Table 2
within the pedestrian shed, indicates how effec-                            indicate that using GIS to account for distance
tively the pedestrian shed captures potential                               along the roadway network and barriers and
pedestrians, or students along these networks.                              facilitators to walking results in a more refined
representation of walkability than does simply
measuring walking distance along a straight-line
Results                                                                     or even along the roadway network. To further
understand this difference and illustrate the
Table 2 summarizes the results. For all school                              findings, it is helpful to examine three selected
districts, PRD values decrease as the pedestrian                            schools – Bear Lake Elementary in Seminole
shed is adjusted. Decreasing values indicate that                           County, Pineloch Elementary in Orange County
as the pedestrian shed is adjusted to the roadway                           and Seven Springs Elementary in Pasco County.
network and to barriers and facilitators, PRD                               Table 3 lists the pedestrian shed size, the PRD
increases, that is, shorter, more direct paths to                           value and the student count for the three
schools are available. Orange and Seminole                                  pedestrian sheds corresponding to each school.
Counties, which have had policies to coordinate                             Figure 2 illustrates these pedestrian sheds for each
school siting with residential development,                                 school.
have the highest number of children in close                                   Bear Lake Elementary is situated in a neighbor-
proximity to schools overall. In contrast, the                              hood with an eroding grid street pattern. Upon



Table 2: Average pedestrian route directness and student count for schools in sample of four counties in Tampa Bay and Orlando
areas

Corresponding pedestrian sheda,b                  Pedestrian route directness (avg.)                                 Student count (avg.)

1                      2                   3                      1                2

Orange County schools                      2.08                 1.82                   1.63                 216.27             44.09
Seminole County schools                    2.30                 1.79                   1.44                 232.50             57.25
Pasco County schools                       2.06                 1.96                   1.45                 147.34             30.67
Hillsborough County schools                2.24                 1.68                   1.37                 156                68.07
a
Pedestrian shed numbering corresponds to methodological steps: (1) Calculated using straight-line distance; (2) Adjusted based on
distance along the roadway network and school attendance zone boundaries; (3) Adjusted based on barriers and facilitators to
walking.
b
This table takes into account a sample of 32 schools randomly selected across the four counties, as determining the location of
barriers and facilitators to walking required field-work and interviews.


r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317       URBAN DESIGN International         Vol. 16, 1, 51–62


















































3

66.73
98.5
62.5
59.07









57

Bejleri et al



Table 3: Examination of three selected schools

Corresponding pedestrian sheda        Pedestrian shed size (sq. miles)           Pedestrian route directness               Student

1              2               3           1           2             3           1        2

Bear Lake Elementary                 0.50          0.08             0.36        3.32        1.94         1.39          203      21
Pineloch Elementary                  0.50          0.24             0.18        1.51        1.35         1.36          221      34
Seven Springs Elementary             0.50          0.10             0.18        2.03        1.79         1.66          190      15
a
Pedestrian shed numbering corresponds to methodological steps: (1) Calculated using straight-line distance; (2) Adjusted based on
distance along the roadway network and school attendance zone boundaries; (3) Adjusted based on barriers and facilitators to
walking.




Figure 2: Pedestrian sheds for three selected schools.



adjusting the straight-line pedestrian shed (shed                          for these facilitators the shed size rebounds to
#1 shown in circular white dashed line) to account                         0.36 square miles (shed #3 shown in solid thick
for network distance, several disconnected cul-de-                         black line). The pedestrian paths contribute to
sacs cause a drop in the shed’s size from 0.5                              decreased PRD values (reflecting more direct
square miles for shed #1 to less than one-tenth of a                       routes) and the capture of an additional 100
square mile for shed #2 shown in solid white line.                         students within the shed.
Two formalized pedestrian paths connect these                                 Pineloch Elementary represents an opposing
cul-de-sacs to rear school entrances. After adjusting                      scenario. A major high speed limited access

58                     r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317    URBAN DESIGN International    Vol. 16, 1, 51–62






count

3

122
27
39



























freeway (Interstate 4) running diagonally in the
north-east to south west side of the school bisects
the SAZ. However an underpass to the northeast
of the school allows access for some students
living on the north side past the interstate road
which explains the expansion of sheds #2 and #3
past the interstate on the north side. The interstate
generates substantial traffic on a major north-
south roadway intersecting the neighborhood
south of the school. Although the underpass
facilitates walking accessibility, the north-south
arterial acts as a barrier to walking. Unlike the
case of Bear Lake in which the pedestrian shed
size increases upon accounting for barriers and
facilitators to walking, the proximity of the
major arterial in the case of Pineloch causes a
decrease in pedestrian shed size from 0.24 square
miles to 0.18 square miles, capturing seven fewer
students.
Seven Springs Elementary is located adjacent to
a neighborhood with a curvilinear street pattern
and several cul-de-sacs. Only 15 students are
captured within the pedestrian shed as measured
along the roadway network (shed #2 shown in
solid white line) without accounting for barriers
and facilitators. As in the case of Bear Lake,
however, pedestrian paths exist, linking cul-de-
sacs to a rear school entrance. Unlike Bear Lake’s
formal pathways, the pathways near Seven
Springs are informal, yet they produce similar
results. Upon accounting for the pathways, the
pedestrian shed size increases from 0.10 square
miles (shed #2) to 0.18 (shed #3), and an
additional 24 students fall within the pedestrian
shed. The importance of direct routes is illustrated
by the small island of students living directly to
the northwest of Seven Springs (small donut hole
shown in black solid line). These students live in
close proximity to the school, but no direct route
exists between their cul-de-sacs and the school,
resulting in a lack of accessibility.


Summary of Findings

Findings emerging from this detailed analysis
include:

K   Major roadways can be common barriers to walking;
however, the barrier may be mitigated by careful
placement of SAZ boundaries and/or the presence of
a school crossing guard. A major roadway bisects
the pedestrian sheds of all three schools. In the
case of Bear Lake, the SAZ boundary runs

r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317
The role of barriers and facilitators to walking



along the major road, negating the barrier as
students living across the road are zoned to
another school. A crossing guard may also
negate a major road’s impact on accessibility,
as in the case of Seven Springs where a crossing
guard is positioned at the intersection of a
major road just east of the school.
K   Formal and informal pedestrian pathways may
increase the size of the pedestrian shed, capturing
more students. The travel can be shortened by
creating a more direct path from a disconnected
street grid or by creating additional entrances to
the school. Pedestrian pathways present at both
Bear Lake and Seven Springs allow walking
access to school for increased numbers of
students. This finding is also illustrated in the
pocket of students living on cul-de-sacs dis-
connected from Seven Springs’ rear entrance
who do not fall within the pedestrian shed.
K   SAZ boundary placement may affect the presence
and role of barriers and facilitators within the
pedestrian shed. The boundary placement may also
affect how effectively the pedestrian shed captures
student residential density. Pineloch’s SAZ
boundary in combination with the major
north-south arterial limit the amount of resi-
dential density captured within the pedestrian
shed. In the case of Bear Lake and Seven
Springs, accounting for facilitators to walking
results in increased capture of student residen-
tial density.



Discussion and Conclusions

Understanding the complexities of the built
environment and the experience a child entails
between home and school is important. Much of
the analysis on urban form of neighborhoods in
the current literature use simplified surrogates
of the distance that pedestrians need to travel,
such as straight-line distance, block length or
size, street or intersection density to name a few.
Although these measures provide a good indica-
tion of the overall characteristics of a street
network in a neighborhood, they do not always
accurately account for the conditions that face
pedestrians in their daily travels. When people
walk toward a specific destination they will seek
the shortest path – whether formal or informal –
that will get them safely there. For children
walking to school, the distance can be measured
more accurately along the paths that include

URBAN DESIGN International    Vol. 16, 1, 51–62                     59

Bejleri et al



barriers that lengthen or facilitators that shorten
the distance. Barriers can include school atten-
dance boundaries, major highways, hazardous
walking conditions and fences. Facilitators include
school crossing guards, informal paths and back
entrances to school sites that connect to cul-de-sac
neighborhoods.
This study examines the potential for children
to walk to school by using GIS to analyze the role
of barriers and facilitators along a pathway
network. Accounting for changes to the roadway
network caused by barriers and facilitators offers
a more realistic version of the true distance a child
could potentially walk and more closely aligns
with the actual way that pedestrians walk in and
around a neighborhood. The method used here
indicates that, different from common measure
of walkability that uses straight-line distance or
network distance, GIS can assist in providing
a more accurate assessment of the walkability by
factoring in barriers and facilitators in the
calculation of the pedestrian network distance.
The study found that barriers and facilitators
play critical roles in how the urban landscape
can be traversed and, in turn, greatly affect
walkability and accessibility to school.
This research has implications beyond chil-
dren’s travel to school. The GIS methodology
presented here can be generalized for broader
applicability to the analysis of pedestrian travel
as a function of physical urban form. For instance,
network analysis that includes barriers and
facilitators could be used to assess walkability to
a variety of neighborhood locations, such as
shopping centers, restaurants, churches or transit
stops. Barriers to such destinations include free-
ways and wide streets with long distances
between crossing walks. Conversely, pedestrians
may use facilitators that shorten their walking
distance, such as informal and formal pathways
connecting cul-de-sacs and pedestrian over-
passes.
The GIS automation of network distance calcu-
lations enables flexibility in replicating the same
methodology for a variety of pedestrian sheds,
either smaller or larger than the half mile distance
used in this study. Once the pedestrian network
is adjusted to include barriers and facilitators,
GIS can easily recalculate the pedestrian shed
boundaries, network paths, residential dwelling
count or other variables used in the study for
different shed sizes.
It is recognized that in addition to the distance,
social concerns and personal decisions contribute

60                   r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.




to or inhibit the ability to walk between places.
Additional research is needed to investigate these
interactions in coupling such findings with what
we know and continue to discover about the
impacts of our built environments on walkability.
For instance, the GIS methodology of this study
could be expanded to include assessment of
some of the other important variables affecting
walkability such as safety from crime and safety
from traffic. GIS layers of crime incidences,
pedestrian crashes, graffiti and other signs of
social disorder can be spatially overlaid on the
pedestrian network and each segment of the
network could be ranked and weighted based
on these factors. This analysis could be useful to
inform and target education, law enforcement
and policies to enhance the walkability for
children. Equipped with this information and
the tools to conduct studies like this one is
encouraging for future research on this and
related topics.
It is important to emphasize that the accuracy
of the results developed by the GIS computations
depends on the quality of the input data. Typical
GIS roadway networks do not include a complete
inventory of formal pedestrian walking paths,
greenways, sidewalks and informal paths. Field
observations will generally be needed to adjust
the GIS roadway network to account for
pedestrian travel paths and to understand the
broader physical conditions impacting the walk-
ing paths.
In addition to the contribution on the GIS
methodology, this study provides findings that
have broader importance to the walkability as
it relates to the physical environment. The
elements of urban form, such as the layout and
configurations of urban blocks and street net-
works, permeability and connectivity do affect
our opportunities to walk. Planning and design of
physical urban environments that are conducive
to walking are affected by policy and implemen-
tation of the policy through urban design.
From the policy viewpoint, these findings can
be used to develop better policies and regulations
to enhance walkability for children. School Boards
(decision makers for school locations) and Plan-
ning Departments (decision makers on urban
development) should coordinate their efforts to
promote policies that support location of schools
in close proximity to high density developments
served by a well-connected and safe pedestrian
circulation network. Delineation of SAZs should
include criteria that increase walkability to school

1357-5317   URBAN DESIGN International   Vol. 16, 1, 51–62





by maximizing the number of students that go to
the nearest school considering the pedestrian
network adjusted for barriers and facilitators.

Related to this, these decision makers must
strategically locate entrances to school to max-
imize access without jeopardizing safety. Addi-
tionally the use of bicycles should be encouraged

to potentially increase active travel.

At the urban design level, considerations
should be given to the layout of street network
blocks and buildings to support safe pedestrian
circulation with good permeability connectivity
and accessibility throughout the neighborhood. In

particular, findings from this study emphasize the
importance of designing for connected pedestrian
paths that minimize barriers and maximize
facilitators. Suitable sidewalks that shelter pedes-
trian well from vehicle traffic, well-designed

intersection crossing that are pedestrian friendly,
inclusion of pedestrian-only designated paths that
connect residencies to other paths to school and
well-designed and strategically placed pedestrian
overpasses or underpasses. The design of the

well-connected safe paths should be extended
to the use of bicycles which students can use to
travel longer distances.



Notes


1 Community-based program to increase opportunities for

children to walk to and from school (www.cdc.gov/

nccdphp/dnpa/kidswalk/).

2 A walking school bus is a group of children who walk to

school with one or more adults. It can be as informal as

two families taking turns walking their children to school to

as structured as a route with meeting points (www

.walkingschoolbus.org).

3 An auxiliary police officer, community-volunteer, or other

official who directs traffic for the purpose of assisting

children in crossing streets near a school. Crossing guards

are typically employed by local governments.

4 School districts in the state of Florida are coterminous with

Florida’s county boundaries.

5 De-identified data refer to a data set in which sensitive

information has been removed to protect the identity of

students.




References

City of Raleigh, North Carolina. (2008) Design guidelines for
pedestrian-friendly neighborhood schools, http://www
.raleighnc.gov/publications/Planning/Guides,_Handbooks_
and_Manuals/School_Design_Guidelines.pdf, accessed 16
June 2008.



r 2011 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1357-5317
The role of barriers and facilitators to walking



Collins, D. and Kearns, R. (2005) Geographies of inequality:
Child pedestrian injury and walking school buses in
Auckland, New Zealand. Social Science and Medicine 60(1):
61–69.
Dellinger, A. and Staunton, C. (2002) Barriers to children
walking and biking to school in the United States. 1999.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 51(32): 701–704.
Dietz, W.H. (1998) Health consequences of obesity in youth:
Childhood predictors of adult disease. Pediatrics 101(3 Pt 2):

518–525.
Dill, J. (2004) Measuring network connectivity for bicycling
and walking. Presented at the Annual Transportation
Research Board meeting, Washington DC.
Ewing, R. (1999) Pedestrian- and transit-friendly design:
A primer for smart growth. EPA Smart Growth Network,
http://www.lcd.state.or.us/LCD/TGM/docs/ReidEwing
Primer_primer.pdf, accessed 16 March 2010.
Ewing, R. and Greene, W. (2003) Travel and Environmental
Implications of School Siting. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). EPA231-R-03-004.
Fagot-Campagna, A. et al (2000) Type 2 diabetes among
North American children and adolescents: An epidemio-
logic health perspective. Journal of Pediatrics 136(5):
664–672.
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). (2010) Safe routes
to school program, http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/saferoutes/,
accessed 15 March 2010.
Frank, L.D., Schmid, T.L., Sallis, J.F., Chapman, J. and Saelens,
B.E. (2005) Linking objectively measured physical activity
with objectively measured urban form: findings from
SMARTRAQ. American Journal of Preventive Medicine
28(2S2): 117–125.
Freeman, C. and Quigg, R. (2009) Commuting lives: Children’s
mobility and energy use. Journal of Environmental Planning
and Management 52(3): 393–412.
Frumkin, H., Frank, L. and Jackson, R. (2004) Urban Sprawl and
Public Health: Designing, Planning, and Building for Healthy

Communities. Washington DC: Island Press.

Hannon, T.S., Rao, G. and Arslanian, S.A. (2005) Childhood

obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Pediatrics 116(2):

473–480.

Kerr, J., Rosenberg, D., Sallis, J.F., Saelens, B.E., Frank, L.D. and

Conway, T.L. (2006) Active commuting to school: Associa-

tions with environment and parental concerns. Medicine &

Science in Sports & Exercise 38(4): 787–793.

Larsen, K., Gilliand, J., Hess, P., Tucker, P., Irwin, J. and He, M.

(2009) The influence of the physical environment and

sociodemographic characteristics on children’s mode of

travel to and from school. American Journal of Public Health

99(3): 520–526.

McDonald, N.C. (2007) Children’s mode choice for the school

trip: The role of distance and school location in walking to

school. Transportation 35: 23–35.

McMillan, T. (2006) The relative influence of urban form on a
child’s travel mode to school. Transportation Research, Part A
41(1): 69–79.
McMillan, T., Day, K., Boarnet, M., Alfonzo, M. and Anderson,
C. (2006) Johnny walks to school – Does Jane? Sex dif-
ferences in children’s travel to school. Children’s Youth and
Environments 16(1): 71–89.
Mitchell, H., Kearns, R. and Collins, D. (2007) Nuances of
neighborhood: Children’s perceptions of the space between
home and school in Auckland, New Zealand. Geoforum 38:
614–627.



URBAN DESIGN International       Vol. 16, 1, 51–62                     61
