

Journal of the American Planning Association                    1                              2020 | Volume 0 Number 0
Review Essay
Toward Mobility Justice: Linking Transportation and Education Equity
in the Context of School Choice
Ariel H. Bierbaum           Alex Karner          Jesus M. Barajas
ABSTRACT
Problem, research strategy, and findings: Transportation equity research addresses questions of
participation and planning process or the distribution of transportation’s benefits and burdens. This work
largely elides issues related to youth and student travel. Existing work on school trip mode choice does not
engage deeply with the equity implications of its findings. Education equity researchers identify the abstract
notion of choice as equity enhancing but do not engage with the realities of disparate transportation resources
and infrastructure. In this review essay, we articulate the contours of transportation equity, youth travel, and
school choice research. We use emerging perspectives on “mobility justice” to frame the issues and provide
vocabulary that can help bring education and transportation together in planners’ everyday work.
Takeaway for practice: A mobility justice framework encourages critical thought and action to address the
root causes of inequities. Our conclusions make three contributions to research and practice: 1) challenging
school district leaders to think about choice systems designed for access to schools, not just access to infor-
mation about available options; 2) clarifying the broader implications of school choice by refusing to look
away from the racial implications of forecasts; and 3) elucidating the need for a regional perspective.
Keywords: accessibility, education equity, mobility justice, school choice, transportation equity
A
cross the United States, school districts are          physical access to specific sites and the transportation
increasingly turning away from traditional             infrastructure that enables it.
neighborhood schools and implementing poli-                  Second, the school travel literature is relatively silent
cies that provide families with choices outside        on the equity implications of its findings. Whereas broader
their residential location. In many cases, these school           transportation equity scholarship addresses issues of fund-
choice policies aim to increase access to high-quality            ing, public participation, and disparate accessibility for
education and achieve education equity. This shift has            immigrants, women, low-income people, and other vul-
profound but underappreciated implications for student            nerable populations, it misses a highly marginalized group
travel behavior that vary by location and for different           in its neglect of youth, particularly youth of color or those
demographic groups. Transportation equity research                from lower income households. Considering persistent
school segregation, racial disparities in school quality and
examines these types of outcomes but has engaged lit-
outcomes, and operating structures of districts, the earlier
tle with student travel. In this review essay, we bring
school travel behavior research proves necessary, but
together these two disconnected areas of scholarship
insufficient, to address questions of equitable school
to highlight gaps in each field that must be addressed
access in the United States.
to achieve equity in both domains and to draw out                       Third, questions of access are complicated amid the
implications for practitioners. We use emerging per-              persistent inequities that plague the U.S. educational
spectives on mobility justice to frame the issues and             landscape. School districts serving the most students of
provide vocabulary that brings education and transpor-            color receive $1,800 less per student than districts with
tation together in planners’ everyday work.                       the fewest students of color, and high-poverty districts
Three interrelated research and practice factors            receive $1,000 less per student than low-poverty dis-
motivate our effort. First, transportation research has           tricts (Morgan & Amerikaner, 2018). Schools are deeply
treated school and youth travel largely in the context of         segregated: 40% of Black and Latinx students attend
active travel propensity, mode choice, and related pub-           intensely segregated schools (Orfield et al., 2019). Only
lic health effects. Yet school travel is more than just a         50% of Black and Latinx students achieve basic reading
matter of mode choice and has impacts beyond public               skills, and only 14% of English language learners achieve
health. Access to quality schools is predicated on                math proficiency by fourth grade (Nation’s Report Card,
DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2020.1803104     | ß 2020 American Planning Association, Chicago, IL.
Color version available at tandfonline.com/rjpa























































Journal of the American Planning Association
2017). Wealthy parents can select their residential loca-
tion to take advantage of high-quality schools, whereas
parents of low socioeconomic status cannot
(Rothstein, 2017).
School choice policies have grown in popularity as
a response to these inequities. Under systems of choice,
the normative ideal of a neighborhood school to which
students can walk or bike wanes, calling for additional
approaches to transportation analyses. Both advocates
and critics of school choice address questions of trans-
portation access only in limited ways, even though
physical access to schools is the fundamental premise

through which choice ostensibly facilitates education

equity. If students do not have affordable, reliable, and

convenient transportation options that connect them to

quality schools, school choice policies will not bene-

fit them.
The ground gained by earlier school travel studies
has provided a strong foundation for a next generation
of research that bridges transportation and educational
equity in the context of school choice. In this review
essay, we use a mobility justice framework that encour-
ages critical thought and action to address the root
causes of inequities. Our conclusions contribute to
research and practice in three ways: 1) challenging
school district leaders to think about choice systems
designed for access to schools, not just access to infor-
mation about available options; 2) clarifying the broader
implications of school choice by refusing to look away
from the racial implications of forecasts; and 3) elucidat-
ing the need for a regional perspective.


Transportation and Education Equity
Literatures in the U.S. Context
Transportation equity and justice have a well-defined
foundation in the United States, emerging from the
application of civil rights and environmental justice laws

and guidance to transportation planning and decision

making (Marcantonio et al., 2017). School choice has a

complicated history with roots in both segregationist

and desegregation movements, radical local control

efforts particularly in Black communities, and more
recently within a broader context of neoliberalism
informed by the market ideals of freedom and competi-
tion (Chubb & Moe, 1990; J. T. Scott, 2012, 2013;
Stulberg, 2016). Although school choice policies and
practices are certainly in use elsewhere around the
world,1 a narrower focus on the United States is import-
ant. The situation for people of color in the United
States is unique; following 250 years of slavery and seg-
regation, widely divergent health, wealth, incarceration,
and quality-of-life outcomes persist despite robust civil
2                               2020 | Volume 0 Number 0
rights laws, regulations, and other guidance prohibiting
discrimination in the allocation of federal funds.
We focus on research produced between the early
2000s and the present. The intellectual foundations for
school choice trace back decades, but more recent and
widespread attention to choice emerged in the late
1990s after the passage of the first charter school law in
the United States. Accordingly, academic research on
school choice and its impacts began to appear in earn-
est in the early 2000s. Nationwide efforts to promote
“Safe Routes to School” through federal transportation
policy also began around this time, with philanthropic
research funding following.2

We identify relevant monographs, edited volumes,

and journals. We use standard academic search tools

(e.g., Google Scholar, Web of Science, and the

Transportation Research International Documentation
database) to mitigate gaps. Our review also includes
gray literature produced by think tanks and policy insti-
tutes because this work is often inspired directly by the
needs of practitioners.


What Is Mobility Justice?
The ability to move or to stay in place is unevenly distrib-
uted. Some can travel with relative ease and comfort
across vast distances at great speed, whereas others
endure daily trips that cover very little space but take
incredible amounts of time. Refugees, domestic violence
survivors, and those fleeing natural disasters must all
move when they would prefer not to. Rather than seeing
this unevenness as an incidental effect of social organiza-
tion, governance, and individual choice, mobility justice
posits that it is a defining feature of exploitative systems
that endow certain types of subjects with more value and
power than others (Cresswell, 2010; Sheller, 2018a, 2018b;
Sheller & Urry, 2006). Achieving justice requires addressing
the root causes of this unevenness across multiple scales
(Sheller, 2018b). The mobility justice perspective provides
the vocabulary and tools necessary for this task.

Mobility justice presents practical challenges to exist-

ing perspectives on transportation equity and justice.

Questions of distributive outcomes—how benefits and

burdens fall on different groups—dominate transportation
planning processes and equity research. The mobility just-
ice perspective pulls the lens back from this narrow dis-
tributive focus, imploring broad thinking about who
engages in transportation decision making and which
topics and questions are considered valid, critically inter-
rogating the scales at which solutions are sought. Mobility
justice resists a narrow focus on infrastructure and policy
decisions and considers different types of impacts (Attoh,
2019; Enright, 2019; Sheller, 2018a).
For example, consider planning efforts to promote
alternatives to automobile travel. A mobility justice


perspective confronts not only the extremely low access
to opportunities experienced by carless individuals in an
auto-dominated society but also contends with regional
transportation performance metrics based on conges-
tion mitigation, domestic environmental injustices asso-
ciated with carbon-based fuels, and the global causes
and consequences of crude oil extraction. Although
individual planners are necessarily limited in what they
can accomplish within their organizations, recognizing
the local-to-global nature of planning problems and
supporting ongoing work across scales is ultimately
needed to achieve just outcomes.
Sheller (2018a) discusses five types of justice as fun-
damental components of mobility justice: distributive,
deliberative, procedural, restorative, and epistemic.
Mobility justice critiques transportation equity for its
narrow focus on distributive justice that emphasizes
access to opportunities but elides the broader questions
raised above. Deliberative and procedural justice draws
from the literature and practice of public involvement
familiar to planners. Deliberative and procedural justice

consider who is involved in decision making, the extent

to which they can affect outcomes, and whose know-

ledge is considered valid. Restorative justice involves

acknowledging and addressing the historical processes

that have led to current disparities. Finally, epistemic

justice requires creating new knowledge by addressing

gaps in understanding and seeing across scales.

Although access to education has not explicitly

been part of mobility justice discourse to date, the

framework can bring together transportation and edu-
cation equity. Education inequity is a multiscalar, histor-
ical, and embodied process inextricably tied to
movement in a double sense: Caregivers and children
must physically travel to school sites, and education is
necessary to achieve social mobility. Efforts to integrate
schools in the United States throughout the latter half
of the 20th century led to inexorable White flight and
accelerated automobile-dependent suburban sprawl.
Since that time, schools in the United States have re-
segregated, and districts have cut transportation serv-
ices while expanding systems of choice. With uneven
quality and resources, some students face an impossible
choice: long distances and travel times to choice
schools or segregated neighborhood schools and
attendant negative effects. The former option is likely to
be unavailable for students without access to automo-
biles, and the latter reduces the likelihood that they will
advance. Seen in this light, these policies often provide
only the illusion of choice while keeping disadvantaged
students further from high-quality education. The alter-
native strategy involving uniformly improving neighbor-
hood schools has thus far been elusive.
Both transportation and education equity are
rightly concerned with disparate outcomes. But a
3                                 Toward Mobility Justice
mobility justice perspective forces a more difficult con-
versation about the origins of disparities and the
ongoing processes that continue to reproduce them.
We illustrate the relationships between transportation
equity, education equity, and mobility justice in Figure
1. As demonstrated further below, mobility justice offers
a powerful framework for identifying research and prac-
tice directions where the two fields meet.



Access and Equity in School
Travel Analyses
Transportation systems connect people to opportunities
they need to lead a meaningful life, a benefit captured
by the term accessibility. They also produce harmful
negative effects, including air pollution, noise, and visual
intrusions. Transportation equity research addresses
how transportation planning decisions are made and
how benefits and burdens are distributed across people

and places (Karner et al., 2016, 2018).

Scholarly discussions of transportation equity often

focus on distributive justice concerns with a particular

emphasis on the potential for people to access employ-

ment, as shown in Figure 1 (e.g., Martens, 2017; Martens

et al., 2012). This work emphasizes the potential to reach

opportunities rather than the choices people make. A

wide-ranging literature has established accessibility

inequities across race, income, gender, and immigration

status, among other characteristics (e.g., Blumenberg &

Agrawal, 2014; Giuliano, 2003; Hanson & Pratt, 1995;
Loukaitou-Sideris, 2014; Rosenbloom & Fielding, 1998;
Tal & Handy, 2010). Other work addresses questions of
procedural and deliberative justice in transportation
planning, providing specific recommendations for pro-
cess design (e.g., Aimen & Morris, 2012; Bickerstaff &
Walker, 2001; Karner & Marcantonio, 2018). Restorative
and epistemic justice concerns have been largely
absent to date, with a few exceptions (e.g., Marcantonio
et al., 2017; Martens & Golub, 2018).
Also absent from many of these conversations
about transportation equity and accessibility are ques-
tions of school access or youth engagement, despite
the obvious importance of education and the con-
strained nature of young people’s travel choices.
Existing literature on school travel engages weakly with
equity issues. Much of that work focuses on the deter-
minants of active travel to school, motivated by con-
cerns about sedentary lifestyles that fuel obesity (see
the Technical Appendix Table 1). In the 1960s, nearly
half of all school trips were by foot or bike; by 2009,
they were down to slightly more than 1 in 10, whereas
rates of driving to school nearly tripled to 45%
(McDonald et al., 2011).

Journal of the American Planning Association
Transportation
equity
Participation/
Burdens              Benefits
process

Accessibility

School trip              Youth/student

mode choice                  travel
Mobil
Legend

Broad research area


Specific components
Figure 1. Schematic map of the mobility justice framework with
Several structural changes are responsible for the
decline in active travel and increase in driving to school.
Distance to school has been the strongest factor predict-
ing active travel in the United States (Rothman et al., 2018);
studies using travel survey data consistently find that the
closer students live to school, the more likely they are to
walk or bike (McDonald et al., 2011; Schlossberg et al.,
2006; Wilson et al., 2010; Zuniga, 2012). Suburban school
districts often site new schools in greenfields, along major
roads with ample car access, limiting the ability of students
to walk or bike (Bejleri et al., 2009; Deka & Hagen, 2015;
Steiner et al., 2008). With increasing suburbanization and
school choice, travel distances also have increased
(Rothman et al., 2018).
Household composition and social networks also
influence how students get to school. Driving increases in
households with single parents or two working parents
where automobile travel allows for greater flexibility amid
complicated household travel logistics (Dieleman et al.,
2002; Makarewicz, 2013; McDonald & Aalborg, 2009;
Schlossberg et al., 2006). Women are usually primary care-
givers and are more likely to escort children to school
regardless of mode, so less flexibility in work hours and
negative perceptions of safety inhibit walking and cycling
to school (He, 2013; McDonald, 2008c; Vovsha & Petersen,
2005; Yarlagadda & Srinivasan, 2008).
Nearly all studies we reviewed control for race and
ethnicity in descriptive or multivariate analysis, indicat-
ing some recognition of distributive justice concerns.
Most control for household income, and some control
for household structure, free or reduced price lunch sta-
tus (a proxy for poverty), immigrant households, and
4                                   2020 | Volume 0 Number 0
Education
equity
Teaching and                             Composition
Choice                                  Finance
learning                              (segregation)
Parent decision
Access
making

Opportunity          Information

ity justice

Components discussed in                      Existing connections

this review
Weak/nonexistent
Gap areas                                    connections
respect to transportation and education equity.
neighborhood socioeconomic status. But fewer closely
examine the relationships between disadvantage and
school travel outcomes directly. They rarely articulate
equity implications (Technical Appendix Table 1).
Missed opportunities to call out distributive implica-
tions appear in some work that examines the influence
of attitudes and built environment factors on student
mode choice. A study based on 614 responses from an
Alameda County (CA) travel survey found higher odds
of walking among Black students when controlling for
urban form and positive perceptions of neighborhood
social cohesion but less walking among Black students
in neighborhoods with higher shares of Black residents
(McDonald, 2007b). Similarly, analyses of the National
Household Travel Survey show that low-income, Black,
and Latinx students are more likely to walk to school
but travel less overall (McDonald, 2007a, 2008a, 2008b).
Attitudes toward walking and cycling affect parents’
willingness to allow their children to use active modes,
and attitudes vary across cultural backgrounds (Carlson
et al., 2014; McDonald & Aalborg, 2009; McDonald et al.,
2011; McMillan, 2007; Schlossberg et al., 2005; Seraj
et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2010). When controlling for
parental attitudes toward neighborhood factors like
crime or safety, Black and Latinx students are less likely
to walk or bike (McDonald et al., 2011). But attitudes
and transportation availability may be mismatched in
lower income households. For example, a survey of
1,123 middle school students in Eugene (OR) found that
lower income children who held negative perceptions
of walking and cycling were still more likely to walk or
bike (Yang et al., 2012). In these cases, children living in


urban environments where walking is not attractive,
such as high-traffic areas or gang territories, are well
aware of their social environments and take steps to
mitigate their exposure to danger when they lack other
options (Banerjee et al., 2014).
An intricate set of state and federal regulations com-
plicates school transportation. Because of declining public
revenues, many districts cut yellow bus service as a nones-
sential expense even as they turn toward school choice
policies that inherently complicate student travel logistics
(Burgoyne-Allen & Scheiss, 2017). Some districts look to
public transit to bridge this gap, but most U.S. transit agen-
cies emphasize peak-period commute services, not school
trips. They are also prohibited from contracting with school
districts if a viable private school bus provider is available
(Federal Transit Administration & U. S. Department of
Transportation, 2005; Final Policy Statement on FTA’s
School Bus Operations Regulations, 2008).
In locations with limited or no yellow school bus
service, districts and transit agencies have tried to miti-
gate inequities by providing families with low-cost or
free transit passes. But such programs are challenging
to implement because some transit agencies find


school districts “difficult and time-consuming” to work

with (Cain, 2006, p. 146) or because student pass costs
may exceed reimbursements from districts, especially if
passholders can use their passes for non-school-related
trips (Gase et al., 2014; McDonald et al., 2004). Several
studies have documented mixed impacts of these
passes for K–12 students. One study in the San
Francisco Bay Area (CA) using survey, interview, and
focus group data did not find improvements or
increases in school or after-school attendance among
students with free transit passes (McDonald et al., 2004).
In Minneapolis (MN), students with a transit pass missed
fewer days of class than those without a pass, but their
academic outcomes were the same (Fan & Das, 2016).
In Boston (MA), youth with a transit pass took 13% more
school- or work-related trips than they would have
without a discounted pass (Thistle & Paget-
Seekins, 2017).
School choice policies generally increase travel bur-
dens for families. Distances to choice schools are longer
than distances to neighborhood-based schools, sub-
stantially limiting the ability to walk or bike (Wilson
et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2012; Zuniga, 2012). Distance
and transportation options can be constraints in select-
ing a school. Parents of color are more likely to select
schools that offer school bus service and are closer to
home (Wilson et al., 2010). In Philadelphia (PA), a district
with a robust school choice program, travel to school
by public transit takes nearly twice as long as travel by
car, limiting capacity to select citywide schools (M. R.
Scott & Marshall, 2019). When school districts offer
choice but do not provide bus service, emissions and
5                                  Toward Mobility Justice
vehicle miles traveled increase—by 4.5 times in one
estimate—shifting costs onto families and the public,
and may increase absenteeism among high school stu-
dents (Krizek et al., 2014; Stein & Grigg, 2019; Wilson
et al., 2007).
Although distributive and process-oriented justice
questions dominate the existing transportation equity
literature, these same considerations are rarely articu-
lated explicitly in work that addresses youth travel
behavior or travel to schools. Even an accessibility per-
spective is limited because it focuses on the potential
to reach opportunities, rather than the decisions that
students and families make. Mobility justice highlights
the multifaceted nature of justice, forcing decision mak-
ers to attend to the fundamental drivers of observed
disparate outcomes. Education policy is a vital factor
driving ongoing shifts in differences in student travel
behavior, a landscape we address next.


Educational Equity Through


Increased Access
To understand inequity in education, research, policy,

and advocacy efforts examine four broad areas

(Figure 1). First, research on school finance describes
persistent declines and disparities in funding (Baker
et al., 2018; Leachman et al., 2017; Morgan &
Amerikaner, 2018). Further, it documents the positive,
long-term impacts that adequate funding has on aca-
demic, employment, and other life outcomes (Hyman,
2017; Jackson et al., 2015; Johnson & Jackson, 2019).
Second, studies find that school segregation has
increased since the 1990s and that racially segregated,
high-poverty schools are generally underresourced,
have higher suspension rates, employ less experienced
teachers, and have higher teacher turnover (Carter et al.,
2013; Grubb, 2009; Orfield et al., 2012, 2019; Reardon &
Owens, 2014). Third, research on teacher preparation,
recruitment and retention, curricular innovations, and
discipline all argue that what goes on inside schools is a
driver of inequity (Bacher-Hicks et al., 2019; Bristol &
Martin-Fernandez, 2019; Bristol & Mentor, 2018;
Gershenson & Papageorge, 2018; Ladson-Billings, 2009,
2014; Owens, 2017; Simon et al., 2015). Finally, studies
on school choice examine the extent to which increas-
ing options fosters improved academic outcomes and
education equity (Betts & Tang, 2016; Goldhaber, 1999;
Teske & Schneider, 2001).
School choice policies sever the link between
home neighborhood and school location in the hopes
of mitigating negative outcomes of racial and socioeco-
nomic residential segregation. In the United States,
three broad choice approaches exist in a public system:
open enrollment, magnet or other specialized schools,

Journal of the American Planning Association
and charter schools (Cookson et al., 2018). Open enroll-
ment allows students to choose schools outside of their
assigned residential catchment area. Magnet and other
specialized schools offer curricula focused on a specific
theme or alternative educational models. Historically,
many districts created magnet programs to encourage
voluntary desegregation and increase resources to
underserved school communities. These schools may
have selective or special admissions requirements.
Charter schools are publicly funded, privately managed
schools that emerged in the late 1990s. They are gov-
erned by a variety of state laws, but in general they are
required to meet certain academic outcome standards
while enjoying substantial autonomy from the public
school district on staffing, curriculum, and administrative
procedures.
School choice is likely a permanent fixture of U.S.
public education, codified in law, enacted by districts,
and sought after by parents as a normative outcome.
Yet questions persist regarding how and under what
conditions it creates higher quality public schools, facili-
tates equitable access to opportunities, and achieves
greater social, racial, and economic integration (e.g.,
Cookson et al., 2018; Lubienski & Dougherty, 2009).
Some argue that magnet schools and other desegrega-
tion strategies shift patterns of student demographics
and achievement in undesirable ways; others express
concern about how charter schools may siphon away
funds from traditional public schools (e.g., Altonji et al.,
2015; Henig & Stone, 2008; Kaplan & Owings, 2018).
Whereas choice that facilitates desegregation has posi-
tive outcomes for student achievement, charter schools
have a more mixed record (Betts & Tang, 2016; Center
for Research on Education Outcomes, 2015;
Frankenberg et al., 2011).
The functional aspects of choice confront the
issues of family decision making. Although options in
schooling are sometimes framed as a way to empower
parents, navigating choice systems can prove burden-
some for families, especially women, who bear the
brunt of this “choice work” (Andre-Bechely, 2005a;
Pattillo, 2015). This burden stems in part from the num-
ber of factors families consider when selecting schools.
Peer-reviewed and gray literature studies that have
examined how parents make school choices use both
quantitative and qualitative methods. They confirm that
issues of school access are, in part, issues of transporta-
tion access (see Technical Appendix Table 2).
Household travel logistics and transportation availability
feed into the decision-making calculus of families
across race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status, but
interviews and surveys reveal that different demo-
graphic groups weight transportation differently when
making choices (Altenhofen et al., 2016; Kleitz
et al., 2000).
6                              2020 | Volume 0 Number 0
These studies present an increasingly nuanced
understanding of how parents choose schools, whereas
others ask specifically about the travel dimensions of
these choices. Early work in this space follows two
paths: descriptive studies that report on travel time, dis-
tance, and mode choice, often disaggregated by
demographics; and studies that assess the relative
tradeoffs that families gain from traveling further
vis-a-vis school quality, student outcomes, and related
factors.3 Notably, they mostly rely on school district
enrollment data and estimates of travel time, distance,
and mode rather than deploying travel surveys or
qualitative methods to document the actual travel
experiences.
Education research on school travel echoes but
does not directly reference the school travel behavior
literature discussed above. Based on student-level
data, one study found that New York City (NY) elem-
entary school students opting into schools of choice
are more likely to use a school bus or public transpor-
tation than their counterparts who go to their neigh-
borhood school (Cordes & Schwartz, 2018). In locations
with less extensive public transit systems, the associ-
ation between transit use and outcomes is less hope-
ful. For example, in New Orleans (LA)—a school
district that is 100% choice—a study analyzing 17
schools’ bus routes found that travel times for stu-
dents on public transit are nearly three times longer
than for those traveling by car (Lincove & Valant,
2018). A study using student enrollment data in
Baltimore (MD) schools found that changes to the bus
system negatively affected travel for many high school
students (Stein et al., 2017).
Travel distance usually increases for all students
attending schools of choice. However, studies using stu-
dent-level demographics, home location, and school
location data found that Black and Latinx students travel
further than their White and Asian counterparts when
enrolled in choice schools (Corcoran, 2018; Cowen et al.,
2018). In New York City, girls, higher achieving students,
and disadvantaged students travel farther than others
(Corcoran, 2018). In Chicago (IL), analysis of student-
level enrollment data reveals that students of color face
longer commute times and increased travel costs to get
to school (Burdick-Will, 2017). In the Los Angeles (CA)
area, Black students are more likely to enroll in choice
schools and travel further, whereas low-income stu-
dents are more likely to choose the school closest to
their home (He & Giuliano, 2018).
Longer distances and travel times sometimes facili-
tate access to higher quality schools than those within
a student’s residential neighborhood. For example, in
Denver (CO), students who travel longer find schools
with better academic performance, student behavior,
and educational opportunities than schools closer to

7
their homes (Denice & Gross, 2018). But there may be
negative tradeoffs. In Washington (DC), students with
longer commutes were more likely to change schools
during the year or in subsequent years (Blagg,
Rosenboom, et al., 2018). These students also had
slightly higher rates of absenteeism than those with
shorter commutes but no differences in sixth-grade
test score outcomes (Blagg, Rosenboom, et al., 2018).
In an analysis of the American Time Use Survey,
Voulgaris et al. (2019) found that longer student com-
mutes resulted in less time spent sleeping and exercis-
ing. The convergence of school and transportation
choices may affect guardians’ engagement in their
child’s schooling and influence other household travel
and activity choices (Makarewicz, 2013).
Education policy is relatively more advanced com-
pared to transportation policy when addressing ques-
tions of equity. Entirely new models of educational
delivery have been developed during the 20th cen-
tury to address long-standing issues of racial dispar-
ities in educational outcomes. Advocates and
policymakers frame these continual efforts as demon-
strative of a commitment to deliberative and proced-
ural justice by centering parental choice in school
selection and to distributive justice in how these
choices help reallocate public benefits to those most
in need.
Despite these innovations, “choice policies pro-
posed to be more equitable and democratic for parents,
in many ways, still reproduce the schooling inequalities
they were intended to reduce” because of multiple

interacting factors (Andre-Bechely, 2005b, p. 269).

Although naming historic patterns of segregation and

discrimination, choice policies generally lack a deep

commitment to restorative justice in their neglect of

cumulative harms that these underresourced and segre-

gated schools have inflicted on communities of color

and low-income communities. Further, studies have

documented that transportation is an important factor

for parents, yet questions of transportation access oper-

ate across scales and domains, requiring a view beyond

individual school districts. Mobility justice can aid in

bringing the threads of transportation and education
together and pointing a way forward for research
and practice.


Operationalizing Mobility Justice:
Implications for Research and Practice
The principles of transportation equity and education
equity are linked through their emphasis on access.
Transportation equity research has examined how
access to opportunities is distributed across demo-
graphic groups and places and affected by
Toward Mobility Justice
transportation infrastructure provision. But it does not
consider why these distributions come to be or how
they can be mitigated. Nor has it sufficiently grappled
with the complexity of school choice and its implica-
tions for students and families. Education equity
research does a better job at reflecting on historical
drivers, but the proposed remedy of choice does not
situate this approach in the multiscalar reality of fami-
lies’ lived experiences. Further, by de-emphasizing
investments in neighborhood schools, choice policies
complicate the ease with which students can reach
high-quality schools, exacerbating disparities across
demographic groups, limiting the potential benefits of
active travel, and forcing tradeoffs in other house-
hold decisions.
Taken together, these bodies of work reveal the
uneven mobilities endemic to school travel in systems
of school choice. A mobility justice framework bridges
transportation and education equity and points to coor-
dinated cross-disciplinary research. The framework chal-
lenges scholars and practitioners to simultaneously
consider the five types of justice outlined above.
Mainstream approaches emphasize the extent to which
access to transportation or school infrastructure better
distribute benefits and reduce harm to disadvantaged
communities (distributive). Yet they spend less time
addressing the structures of decision making for school
siting or choice policies and transportation to school
(deliberative and procedural) and even less time grap-
pling with the cumulative harm that communities of
color and low-income communities experience because
of policies in both domains (restorative). The lack of

coordinated practice across transportation and educa-

tion sectors illustrates and reinforces the gaps of under-

standing across sectors and scales (epistemic).

The mobility justice framework suggests that taking

up these five dimensions of justice will result in atten-

tion to not only the concerns about material move-

ment—mode, cost, frequency, speed, and distance—

which the literature addresses, but also the “represented

meanings” and “experienced practice” of school travel

(Cresswell, 2010, p. 21). Certainly, the studies described

above begin to reveal differences in the conditions that
shape these experiences. But to truly understand the
embodied practice of travel to school, planners must
give young people and parents “priority as ‘data’”
(Untokening, 2017) and learn about their street-, neigh-
borhood-, and transit-level experiences. Bell (2007,
2009a, 2009b) offers a helpful approach in her study of
parents and school choice in Detroit. Her findings chal-
lenge a narrow definition of travel behavior, arguing
that parents’ geography of schools is more than
“distance and commute time. It is also neighborhood
and community” (Bell, 2009b, p. 493). Her analyses
reveal how persistent structural inequalities, memory,

Journal of the American Planning Association
and the psychological impact of these inequalities
shape what parents see as available choices in ways
that traditional policy approaches do not necessar-
ily consider.
Mobility justice also highlights additional research
methods, such as time–space diaries, “mobile ethno-
graphy,” documenting the “atmosphere of place” and
the affective and performative dimensions of move-
ment, and the use of objects to study the “development
and active performances of memory” (Sheller & Urry,
2006, pp. 217–218). Mixed methods and multidisciplin-
ary approaches will help clarify the nexus of school and
transportation decision making within families and how
these decisions could inform district design and imple-
mentation of choice and transportation systems.
Further, new questions emerge that center the student
and family experience of school travel in systems of
choice, namely the physical health, mental health, social,
and educational effects of different kinds of trips and
other policy domains—housing, environmental health,
policing—that shape the conditions of school travel.

Below, we reflect on three specific areas for planners in

school districts and other public agencies to consider.


Mobility Justice Challenges School District
Leaders to Think About Systems Designed
for Access to Schools, Not Just Access to

Information

School choice policies as a pathway to equity rely on

parent decision making as the key lever of change. Of

course, school districts understand that dispersing stu-

dents districtwide through choice means complicated
travel logistics. Yet districts often focus their resources

on maximizing access to information, designing trans-
parent and centralized enrollment protocols, and dis-
seminating information (Gross & Campbell, 2017; MIT
School Access and Quality Summit, 2018; Schneider
et al., 2000). These approaches do not sufficiently grap-
ple with how and why families make choices, the extent
to which they consider transportation logistics and
travel experience, and the unevenness of these
experiences.
The mobility justice framework challenges school
district leaders to use other approaches. One example is
school attendance zone design. Catchment areas affect
students’ travel, access to resources, and exposure to
different people and experiences. Traditional district
analyses use metrics like school capacity, utilization, and
condition. These approaches center the building rather
than the student. Recalling Cresswell (2010), asking
young people questions about the burdens of travel to
school (material movement), the perception of one
school versus another or of particular modes of travel
(representational meanings), and their fears and joys
8                                2020 | Volume 0 Number 0
during school travel (experienced practice) disrupt typ-
ical analyses. A mobility justice framework also calls for
a deep engagement with history to achieve restorative
justice. When designing school attendance zones, a dis-
trict reckoning with the history, benefits, and burdens of
(de)segregation may balance school travel and student
composition differently than if they were only looking
at present conditions. A district committed to delibera-
tive and procedural justice would center the voices of
students most harmed by segregation in making these
decisions. A district pursuing epistemic justice would
structure a process wherein decisions are intertwined
with policies of neighborhood and metropolitan segre-
gation, even if those boundaries transcend school dis-
trict jurisdiction.


Mobility Justice Clarifies the Broader
Implications of School Choice by Refusing to
Look Away From the Racial Implications

of Forecasts

Planners rely heavily on land use forecasts to evaluate

future infrastructure adequacy. State demographers pro-
duce aggregate county-level forecasts often used by
others (e.g., Smith et al., 2013). The most sophisticated
regional agencies maintain land use simulation models
that allocate future population and employment to small
areas (e.g., parcels, tracts, or transportation analysis zones)

and serve as inputs to travel demand models. School

choice complicates the veracity of this forecasting chain in

ways that have not previously been appreciated.

Addressing the complications is not straightforward

because of major data limitations.
Land use models often include measures of school

quality that are coded at the neighborhood level. They
have been shown to have an outsized influence on
locational preferences (e.g., Kortum et al., 2012; Zhou &
Kockelman, 2008). With a weak or nonexistent link
between residential and school location in systems of
choice, urban land values and thus location choices
may shift in ways that extant models cannot anticipate.
Further, neither race nor ethnicity is typically used as an
explanatory variable in either land use or travel demand
models (Karner & Niemeier, 2013), even though some
districts have gone to great lengths to ensure racial
homogeneity and despite decades of evidence showing
racially disparate land use decisions (Bischoff, 2008;
Frankenberg, 2009; Frankenberg et al., 2017; Gobillon
et al., 2007; Ihlanfeldt & Sjoquist, 1998). Instead, “color
blind” approaches prevail that either assume current-
year demographic distributions will remain unchanged
or that decisions are made in the model without regard
to race so as to not embed discrimination in future-
year forecasts.


Simply omitting race and ethnicity from modeling
does not eliminate the likely effects on people of color.
Including racial demographics and modifying existing
models to reflect school choice policies are feasible and
would advance multiple justice dimensions but would
entail both technical acumen and political will. If an
agency decided to pursue this path, it would face chal-
lenges requiring original data collection. Much of the
necessary data are simply not currently available. There
are too few student travel questions in the National
Household Travel Survey, too few rigorously collected
sources of household decision-making processes
regarding school transportation under conditions of
choice, and too few administrative data sets capturing
variables relevant to student transportation. In some
cases, questions about school travel could be added to
travel or activity surveys that would be conducted any-
way by state or regional transportation agencies, but in
others, entirely new survey designs will have to be
devised. Location choice models could also be esti-
mated that consider a much broader range of school
quality variables than those in the residential
neighborhood.
One further complication is that the data collected
are often inaccessible. Individual-level student data are
justifiably protected by both the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA) and subsequent
state regulations. These protections extend the time-
lines of any studies that hope to make use of such data
because of the need to obtain appropriate approvals.
This is hardly unique to education and transportation,
but the issues are particularly stymying when coordin-
ation across multiple data sources is required to truly
articulate structural challenges and develop viable pol-
icy and practice solutions.


Mobility Justice Elucidates the Need for a
Regional Perspective
Regional planning agencies have an important role to
play in advancing the conversation on transportation
equity and education equity in regions across the
United States. To receive federal funding in urbanized
areas with more than 50,000 in population, a metropol-
itan planning organization (MPO) must exist to coordin-
ate transportation planning efforts (Sciara, 2017). This
property makes them a favored level of government for
discussing other regional issues.
From an education equity perspective, the power
of the region is clear (Holme & Finnigan, 2018). A
regional perspective can crystallize disparities in school
quality and other areas across political jurisdictions.
Even though MPOs have no ability to implement policy
solutions that address root causes like regional educa-
tion finance or measures that mitigate housing
9                                  Toward Mobility Justice
discrimination, they can collect data, conduct analyses,
and build partnerships across different regional stake-
holders. Many MPOs have embraced their role as con-
versation starters and conveners to address issues of
regional importance, often driven by actors from out-
side the agency (Pastor et al., 2009; Weir et al., 2009).
The Denver Regional Council of Governments has been
a leader in this regard, partnering with Denver Public
Schools to assess the effects of demographic change on
student enrollment and convening events to discuss
these issues (Denver Public Schools, 2018). Likewise, the
North Central Texas Council of Governments analyzes
school siting, construction, and access and serves as a
convener of local jurisdictions and school districts
(North Central Texas Council of Governments, n.d.).
Although not explicitly informed by questions related to
school choice, the Denver Regional Council of
Governments and North Central Texas Council of
Governments offer models of action for other MPOs.
Building on and cultivating new research–practice
partnerships with school districts, MPOs, local jurisdic-
tions, universities, and think tanks can provide the
needed bridge between action-oriented analytics and
the realities on the ground.4 A research network sup-
ported by public, university, and philanthropic funding
could provide much-needed comparative work. These
efforts could begin to address data concerns, explore
the extent to which traditional transportation data sour-
ces can be used to address questions of education
equity, and consider how more expansive tools, includ-
ing qualitative data collection, could inform analysis
and policy.
A key element of the mobility justice critique of
existing perspectives on transportation equity is that
they focus too narrowly on questions of distributive
justice using readily available travel demand model out-
puts. Instead, the framework enumerates many different
types of justice. These different elements variously
embody the need to address gaps in existing know-
ledge, incorporate uncommon voices into the planning
process, and repair prior harms. Given the interplay
between residential segregation, school segregation,
and upward social mobility, the regional discussion on
school choice and quality must be elevated on the
MPO agenda.
Education and transportation equity have an obvi-
ous affinity. In foregrounding questions of access and
accessibility, both fields highlight the often-disparate
landscape of opportunity faced by historically marginal-
ized groups. They both complicate simplistic evalua-
tions, looking only at commute distances or dividing
groups based on a single characteristic. To evolve, closer
integration is required. In that integration, substantial
complexity emerges that must be resolved to achieve
progress toward the public education goal we highlight

Journal of the American Planning Association                       10
at the beginning of this article: that students have an
opportunity to reach their full potential through high-

quality educational experiences that they can reach

affordably, reliably, and safely.


ABOUT THE AUTHORS
ARIEL H. BIERBAUM (bierbaum@umd.edu) is an assistant
professor of urban studies and planning at the University of
Maryland, College Park. ALEX KARNER
(alex.karner@utexas.edu) is an assistant professor of commu-
nity and regional planning at the University of Texas at Austin.
JESUS M. BARAJAS (barajasj@illinois.edu) is an assistant pro-
fessor of urban and regional planning at University of Illinois
at Urbana–Champaign.



ORCID
Alex Karner       http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3651-8157

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the blind reviewers, Rand Quinn, Lauren J.
Bierbaum, and participants of the 2019 Exploring the
Intersections of Transportation Justice and School Travel
Research Roundtable.


SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

Supplemental data for this article can be found on the

publisher’s website.


NOTES
1. For a recent review on school travel and choice including
international contexts, see Makarewicz (2020). See also Kek et al.
(2019), Malmberg et al. (2014), and Mandic et al. (2017) for

studies on school choice and transport in Sweden and

New Zealand.

2. See, for example, The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s
(2015) Active Living Research and the Safe Routes to Schools
Program (Safe Routes Partnership, n.d.).
3. Many of these appear in the gray literature, motivated by
conundrums that practitioners and policymakers face. For
example, in 2018, the Urban Institute launched the Student
Transportation and Educational Access project and produced
working papers based on data from Denver, Detroit, New Orleans,
New York City, and Washington, DC (Blagg, Chingos, et al., 2018;
Urban Institute, 2018).

4. Similar partnership efforts have been successful in other

regional planning forums (e.g., Karner et al., 2014; Marcantonio &

Karner, 2014).


REFERENCES
Aimen, D., & Morris, A. (2012). NCHRP report 710: Practical
approaches for involving traditionally underserved populations
in transportation decision making (No. 710). Transportation
Research Board.
Altenhofen, S., Berends, M., & White, T. G. (2016). School
choice decision making among suburban, high-income parents.
2020 | Volume 0 Number 0
AERA Open, 2(1), 233285841562409. https://doi.org/10.1177/
2332858415624098
Altonji, J. G., Huang, C.-I., & Taber, C. R. (2015). Estimating

the cream skimming effect of school choice. Journal of Political
Economy, 123(2), 266–324. https://doi.org/10.1086/679497
Andr  e-Bechely, L. (2005a). Could it be otherwise? Routledge.
Andr  e-Bechely, L. (2005b). Public school choice at the intersec-
tion of voluntary integration and not-so-good neighborhood
schools: Lessons from parents’ experiences. Educational
Administration Quarterly, 41(2), 267–305. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0013161X04269593
Attoh, K. (2019, June 25). Transportation justice: From civil
rights to the right to the city. Law and Political Economy.
https://lpeblog.org/2019/06/25/transportation-justice-from-
civil-rights-to-the-right-to-the-city/
Bacher-Hicks, A., Billings, S., & Deming, D. (2019). The school
to prison pipeline: Long-run impacts of school suspensions on
adult crime (No. w26257; p. w26257). National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Baker, B. D., Farrie, D., & Sciarra, D. (2018). Is school funding
fair? A national report card [Report]. Education Law Center and
Rutgers University Graduate School of Education. https://drive.
google.com/file/d/1BGXV3mV7aO5hr3N4MX_nBMJGKZswR-
bS/view
Banerjee, T., Uhm, J., & Bahl, D. (2014). Walking to school: The
experience of children in inner city Los Angeles and implica-
tions for policy. Journal of Planning Education and Research,
34(2), 123–140. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X14522494
Bejleri, I., Steiner, R., Provost, R., Fischman, A., & Arafat, A.

(2009). Understanding and mapping elements of urban form

that affect children’s ability to walk and bicycle to school.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, 2137(1), 148–158. https://doi.org/10.3141/
2137-16
Bell, C. A. (2007). Space and place: Urban parents’ geograph-
ical preferences for schools. The Urban Review, 39(4), 375–404.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11256-007-0059-5
Bell, C. A. (2009a). All choices created equal? The role of

choice sets in the selection of schools. Peabody Journal of

Education, 84(2), 191–208. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01619560902810146
Bell, C. A. (2009b). Geography in parental choice. American
Journal of Education, 115(4), 493–521. https://doi.org/10.
1086/599777
Betts, J. R., & Tang, Y. E. (2016). A meta-analysis of the litera-
ture on the effect of charter schools on student achievement.
Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness. https://eric.
ed.gov/?id=ED566972
Bickerstaff, K., & Walker, G. (2001). Participatory local govern-
ance and transport planning. Environment and Planning A:
Economy and Space, 33(3), 431–451. https://doi.org/10.1068/

a33173

Bischoff, K. (2008). School district fragmentation and racial resi-

dential segregation: How do boundaries matter?. Urban Affairs
Review, 44(2), 182–217. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1078087408320651
Blagg, K., Chingos, M., Corcoran, S. P., Cordes, S. A., Cowen,
J., Denice, P., & Valant, J. (2018). The road to school: How far
students travel to school in the choice-rich cities of Denver,
Detroit, New Orleans, New York City, and Washington, DC
(Research Report). Urban Institute. https://www.urban.org/
research/publication/road-school-how-far-students-travel-
