

Journal of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Transport Geography
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jtrangeo
Exploring changes to cycle infrastructure to improve the experience
of cycling for families
William Clayton a,<U+21D1>, Charles Musselwhite b,1
a
Centre for Transport and Society, Faculty of Environment and Technology, University of the West of England, Bristol BS16 1QY, UK
b
Centre for Innovative Ageing, School of Human and Health Sciences, Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK
a r t i c l e          i n f o                          a b s t r a c t
Keywords:                                               Positive changes to the immediate cycling environment can improve the cycling experience through
Cycling                                                 increasing levels of safety, but little is known about how the intrinsic bene<U+FB01>ts of cycling might be
Infrastructure                                          enhanced beyond this. This paper presents research which has studied the potential bene<U+FB01>ts of changing
Motivation                                              the infrastructure within a cycle network – here the National Cycle Network (NCN) in the United King-
Families
dom (UK) – to enhance the intrinsic rewards of cycling. The rationale in this approach is that this could
Behaviour change
be a motivating factor in encouraging greater use of the cycle network, and consequently help in promot-
ing cycling and active travel more generally amongst family groups. The project involved in-depth
research with 64 participants, which included family interviews, self-documented family cycle rides,
and school focus groups. The <U+FB01>ndings suggest that improvements to the cycling environment can help
maintain ongoing motivation for experienced cycling families by enhancing novel aspects of a routine
journey, creating enjoyable activities and facilitating other incidental experiences along the course of a
route, and improving the kinaesthetic experience of cycling. For those less experienced, this can create
a legitimacy of space and mode that could help dispel real or imagined safety fears associated with
cycling. Despite the potential of these bene<U+FB01>ts to assist in changing travel behaviour, it is acknowledged
that they are not alone a solution to the barriers to greater cycling uptake, and continued development of
off-road and specialist cycle networks must continue.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights r
1. Introduction                                                                             2005; McClintock and Cleary, 1996; Nankervis, 1999; Newby,
1993). For parents in particular, road safety (and to a lesser extent
The need to encourage the public to engage in active travel is                          safety from crime) are important concerns, and they perceive a
seen as important in terms of a healthy and sustainable future                              trade-off between ensuring children’s safety and fostering their
community. The role of cycling is implicit in maintaining health                            independent mobility (Bickerstaff and Shaw,2000; Cahill et al.,
and wellbeing, and reducing environmental pollution (Carnall,                               1996; Tyrrell, 2000) – where social norms tend to err in the favour
2001; Cavill and Davis, 2007; Cavill et al., 2006; Pulcher and                              of personal security over independence (Lorenc et al., 2008). It is
Buehler, 2010). Attitudes and behaviours of parents towards                                 also noted that when good infrastructure is put in place, it does
cycling and active travel are important determinants to whether                             not necessarily increase the amount of cycling (Davies et al.,
or not children cycle (Timperio et al., 2004; McMillan, 2007;                               2001; Welleman, 1997), perhaps because social norms are hard
Wen et al., 2008), and cycling in childhood can in<U+FB02>uence cycling                            to overcome and concerns over safety dominate (TfL, 2009).
throughout life (Jones et al., 2012). However, there are frequently                         Higher-density living is positively correlated with high levels of cy-
documented barriers to cycling for people of all ages, including                            cling (Durand et al., 2011) and segregation from traf<U+FB01>c can increase
feeling unsafe and vulnerable in heavy traf<U+FB01>c, especially as a result                       cycling (Fraser and Lock, 2010; Krizek et al., 2007). But less is
of poor infrastructure and lack of segregated, dedicated or                                 known whether the journey itself can be enhanced for the rider
prioritised routes for cyclists (Bannister, 1988; Krizek and Roland,                        by the infrastructure – beyond segregation and proximity – with
the potential for reducing the need to be close to the journey’s
end to motivate people to cycle. Jay et al. (2009) have explored
<U+21D1> Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 (0) 117 32 82316.                                       the in<U+FB02>uence of public artwork installations along cycle routes,
E-mail addresses: william2.clayton@uwe.ac.uk (W. Clayton), C.B.A.Musselwhite            and the effects of these upon young people’s perceptions and
@Swansea.ac.uk (C. Musselwhite).                                                            experiences of using the route. Those artworks that were seen as
URLs: http://www.uwe.ac.uk/et/research/cts (W. Clayton), http://www.
drcharliemuss.com (C. Musselwhite).
‘‘interactive’’ or ‘‘fun’’ held the most appeal and enriched the expe-
1
Tel.: +44 (0) 1792 518696.                                                              rience of using the cycle path. Importantly, the installations were
0966-6923/$ - see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.09.003






























eserved.





























W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite / Journal of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61
seen to improve the experience and ‘alleviate some of the boredom                              form of on-road cycle path to access the adjacent countryside
of cycling along a route’ (Jay et al., 2009, p. 11).                                           and off-road cycle routes.
This paper examines how far infrastructure changes might                                       A study area in the city of Bristol, was chosen upon to represent
enhance intrinsic motivation – adding excitement and fun into a                                cycling experiences in an urban environment near a mixed off-road
cycling journey – and whether this has the potential to increase                               and on-road cycle network. Participants from Bristol were re-
motivation to cycle amongst young people and families. A dedi-                                 cruited from two residential areas in the north of the city, both
cated space of cycling infrastructure in Britain, the National Cycle                           of which did not have direct links to surrounding countryside. Par-
Network (NCN), is used to contextualise the suggested changes.                                 ticipants had access to off-road urban NCN routes; however all of
The cycle network is a set of co-ordinated routes along traf<U+FB01>c-free                            these required access via on-road cycle paths located on roads
(off-road) or very low traf<U+FB01>c (on-road) routes, covering 13,200                                which were routinely busy with traf<U+FB01>c.
miles in the UK. The network is signposted and numbered for ease
of navigation.
2.2. Participants
2. Methodology
Purposive sampling was used to recruit eight families into three
distinct groups based upon different levels of self-reported cycling
The research involved three phases (see Table 1) which con-
experience (see Table 1). Families were recruited through three
sisted of an initial round of family interviews with eight family
methods: (i) contact with a school group in the Stroud area; (ii)
groups of varied cycling experience (phase 1), followed by a
contact with cycling clubs in Bristol and Stroud; and (iii) through
case-study documentation of a cycle ride by four of these families
attending a Local Authority organised ‘family cycling day’ in Bristol
(which generated visual and narrative data) (phase 2). The <U+FB01>nal
and engaging potential participants.
stage consisted of follow-up interviews with each of the families
Four families from the original sample of eight (2 from group 1,
involved in phase 2 to elicit and explore their case-studies of fam-
and 2 from group 2: 17 participants total) were selected to com-
ily cycling in greater depth (phase 3). In parallel to this, two focus
plete a family cycle trip on the National Cycle Network (NCN)
groups with school-age children were carried out to gain a wider
(phase 2) and an additional family interview (phase 3). These
understanding of the barriers and enablers to cycling amongst
families were selected from the two groups of more experienced
children.
cyclists only, based on ethical considerations of safety (they were
con<U+FB01>dent cyclists) and practical considerations (they had the
2.1. Geographical context                                                                      equipment). One family each from groups 1 and 2 did not wish
to take part in phases 2 and 3.
Two study areas were chosen, one in Stroud, UK, and one in                                     School focus groups were run in a local school with two groups
Bristol, UK. A study area in the town of Stroud, was chosen to re-                             of children based on different life-stages (year 7 children, aged
<U+FB02>ect cycling experiences in a mixed rural and urban area near an                               11–12, were recruited to represent children at threshold of
on-road and off-road cycle network. Participants from Stroud were                              independence, and year 8 children, aged 12–13, as a group who
sampled from an area along the southern fringe of the town, with                               represent just beginning to cycle independently to contrast to this)
good links to the NCN and surrounding countryside. Stroud itself is                            (see Table 1). The school lay in a semi-urban area and represented
surrounded by rural countryside and smaller villages, and as-such                              children from urban, suburban, and rural areas within each age
participants had relatively easy access to these by bike. It should be                         group. The groups were self-selecting as volunteers wishing to take
noted however that all participants nonetheless had to use some                                part and were large enough to allow for all those who came
Table 1
Background details of the participants at different stages of the research.
Family interview group compositions
Group (G) 1: 3 families (12 participants)                 Group (G) 2: 3 families (13 participants)               Group (G) 3: 2 families (8 participants)
Family interview group characteristics
Regularly cycle together as a family activity, equipped   Occasionally cycle together as a family activity,       Rarely/never cycle together as a family activity,
for cycling with extensive recent experience of        equipped for cycling with some recent experience of     equipped for cycling and little/no recent experien
cycling                                                cycling                                                 cycling
Phase (P) 1
3 Families                                                3 Families                                              2 Families
Family 1: Rural/urban                                     Family 4: Rural/urban                                   Family 7: Rural/urban
Adults: 1 M, 1F                                           Adults: 1 M, 1F                                         Adults: 1 M, 1F
Children: 1F 8yrs                                         Children: 1F 6yrs, 1F 10yrs, 1F 16yrs                   Children: 1 M 8yrs, 1 M 10yrs
Family 2: Urban                                           Family 5: Rural/urban                                   Family 8: Urban
Adults: 1 M, 1F                                           Adults: 1 M, 1F                                         Adults: 1 M, 1F
Children: 1 M 7yrs, 1 M 10yrs, 1F 12yrs                   Children: 1 M 4yrs, 1 M 6yrs, 1 M 9yrs                  Children: 1F 10yrs, 1 M 11yrs
Family 3: Rural/urban                                     Family 6: Urban
Adults: 1 M, 1F                                           Adults: 1 M, 1F
Children: 1F 8yrs, 1F 11yrs                               Children: 1 M 9yrs
Phase (P) 2 and Phase (P) 3
2 Families                                                2 Families                                              0 Families
Family 1                                                  Family 4
Family 3                                                  Family 5
School focus groups
Focus group 1: 16 children (8 male; 8 female) in school year 7 (ages 11–12 years)
Focus group 2: 15 children (8 male; 7 female) in school year 8 (ages 12–13 years)
55























































not fully
ce of




















56                                        W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite /
forwards to take part, but represented a wide range of back-
grounds. All participants cycled, but levels of cycling varied from
those who cycled to school and for leisure daily to those who were
infrequent cyclists (once a month or less). Structured group work
during the focus groups took place allowing the size not to be an
issue, meaning much smaller groups worked on questions being
asked before bringing them to the main discussion for debate.

2.3. Procedure

Phase 1: Semi-structured family interviews took place in the
family home with the whole family-household present. Family
interviews were used to gain an insight into the cycling practices
and contexts within the family as a whole, and explore the inter-
play between different characters. Similar to a focus group a family
interview helps generate ideas and stimulate discussion, especially
when talking about both extremes of the everyday and also very
novel concepts. It differs from a traditional focus group however
in that all the members know each other and the relationships
therein, and the context and setting are familiar to all participants
(Eggenberger and Nelms, 2007). At this phase discussion was on
everyday travel behaviour and patterns, their interactions with
the local environment as they travel, what they enjoyed and did
not enjoy about cycling as a family, what would be their ideal cy-
cling context, what leisure activities they engaged in and what
games (electronic and otherwise) they played at home and out-
doors, and speci<U+FB01>c knowledge and use of the NCN. The family
interviews lasted around an hour.
Phase 2: This phase consisted of a case-study documentation of
families’ experiences of using the NCN. Families were provided
with two digital methods of recording the journey – a ‘helmet
cam’ to record the journey in its entirety, and a digital still camera
for participants to log points of interest along the way. In addition,
they were encouraged to note or sketch anything else of interest
using blank journals. They could choose to record a journey of their
choice of around an hour in length that incorporated use of the lo-
cal NCN.
Phase 3: Follow-up interviews were conducted with the four
case-study families to complete the data collection. A map of their
journey undertaken at phase 2 was completed at the next inter-

view along with the interviewer. Families were asked to focus
upon documenting the places along the route which they travelled,

how they interacted with their local area, how enjoyable and

motivating they found the experience, and what the experience

of cycling as a family is like. Similar to method documented by

Hodgson (2011), participants were encouraged to annotate their

map with key areas of interest and importance on their journey.
In addition, their recordings of their journey (from the helmet,
photography and sketching) were discussed and placed alongside
the map. The <U+FB01>ndings from this phase of data collection have been
used to provide recommendations on appropriate ways in which
experiential improvements might be applied to the cycle network
as a motivator for families to cycle
School focus groups: A semi-structured focus group was devel-
oped to explore barriers and enablers to cycling, and create a
discussion of how to overcome some of the barriers. This was done
to examine children’s views away from parental in<U+FB02>uence and
assess peer support for concepts and ideas generated by the partic-
ipants. Sub-groups worked on questions set and reported back to
the group, which then facilitated further discussions. The two
groups lasted approximately 30 min apiece.

2.4. Data analysis

The same process of analysis was maintained throughout the
project. Following recording and transcription from each of the
Journal of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61
interviews and the focus groups, the data was subjected to the-
matic analysis using NVivo 9 software. Data analysis involved a
combination of an ‘etic’ approach (in which the themes are pre-
determined by the researcher) and an ‘emic’ approach (in which
the data suggests the themes) (see Miles and Huberman, 1994;
Silverman, 2001). An initial set of relevant themes was constructed
from existing research. The focus of the starting set of themes was
kept relatively broad to accommodate the exploratory nature of
the topic, and this enabled further themes to be constructed from
the data during the analysis. Data was then placed into these
themes or created new themes (a mixture of emic and etic
approach). Within-case matching of themes occurred to address
consistency and was then followed by between case analysis
addressing both similarities and discrepancies. Elements of simi-
larity and difference were then transformed into a narrative (Aron-
son, 1994) to form the basis of the <U+FB01>ndings. The data from the
video was analysed in the same way and matched to the discussion
of the video within the interviews. The discussions around the pho-
tographs taken by the participants, the annotated maps, and par-
ticipant-drawn sketches were captured in the interview and
included in the analytic approach outlined above.

2.5. Ethical process

Extensive ethical safeguarding was employed to protect the
safety and wellbeing of the participants and the researchers. Con-
<U+FB01>dentiality was ensured through data anonymisation, and written
informed consent was obtained and retained from parents in the
family interviews and in the school focus groups. All groups were
taken through the purpose of the research and read the code of
conduct for focus groups at the beginning of each session.
The health and safety of the families that who took part in the
family cycle (phase 2 of the research) was very important. All of
the cyclists were required to take reasonable personal protective
measures as they would ordinarily do so. Participants were asked
not to deviate signi<U+FB01>cantly from the designated cycle network
route. The families were informed of these stipulations and required
to con<U+FB01>rm these in writing before they were allowed to take part.


3. Findings


The <U+FB01>ndings are presented in terms of positive elements of

cycling followed by the barriers to cycling. How far infrastructural,

environmental, or experiential improvements might help over-

come some of the negative elements in order to help and encour-

age cycling is then discussed.


3.1. Positive elements of cycling

Positive elements of cycling as a family are centred on the kin-
aesthetic experience of riding a bicycle. This was explained as a dif-
ferent feeling to that experienced on other modes of travel, and in
particular, the effortless speed and exhilarating physical experi-
ence made cycling (at times) distinctly pleasurable. Coupled to this
theme were other sensory experiences of interacting with the envi-
ronment, including sights and smells. The signi<U+FB01>cance of novelty in
the experience of cycling was also noted, as was the importance of
having or creating destinations, which both help to mitigate expe-
riences of boredom or ‘ordinariness’.

3.1.1. Kinaesthetic and sensory experiences of riding
Participants described in detail the sensory experience of their
cycle rides together; several explained the excitement and
pleasure created by kinaesthetic experiences: the feeling of the body
moving along with the speed and <U+FB02>ow of the bike ride.

W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite / Journal
‘‘Percy [child – 4yrs] likes to go really fast don’t you, on the bike?
When you are on the back of my bike on your tagalong you go ‘fas-
ter, faster, faster!’ So we go really whizzing and he likes to race
against you guys [the family]. He likes to overtake so we have to
pedal really fast to go past’’ (Adult M, G2:P1)

‘‘I can go fast. I’m on a bike. It’s quite fun. It’s just a lovely feeling’’

(Child F 8yrs, G1:P1)

Other participants explained the sights that they saw along the
route, and discussed how these contributed to the experience of the
ride. These elements were especially noted by girls rather than boys.

‘‘One of the things I really like about that cycle path is the wildlife.

It’s pretty; it’s really pretty. It’s got lovely trees and <U+FB02>owers and a
river, and it’s just a really nice environment to be in’’ (Child F
10yrs, G2:P3)

Getting the participants to document a cycle ride with photo-
graphs, sketches and video footage in particular highlighted other
sensory elements of cycling, noting the sounds and the smells
which merged with the sights and the feelings of cycling to create
the overall experience.
‘‘The thing that I really like about that bridge is that when you cycle
over it, it has got loose slats. The concrete slats that form the bed of
the track are loose, so as you go over it they go ‘bloob, bloob!’ (. . .)
It’s like a xylophone’’ (Adult M, G1:P3)

‘‘A house had loads of lovely roses like growing down the fence and
the new cycle path, and they smelt so nice. They just hit you like
‘ah!’’’ (Child F 11yrs, G1:P3)

One participant explained how she felt that the overall sensory

experience of the ride along cycle paths was often neglected in the

face of a dominant focus on landscaping and sights along the route.

Smell in particular was seen as a neglected consideration in terms
of the experience, and yet both smells and sounds were seen to
have an effect on participants’ experiences of the cycle. Partici-
pants discussed negative experiences of both of these senses, in
particular relation to harsh traf<U+FB01>c noises and dogs fouling the cycle
path.

‘‘I said about the traf<U+FB01>c noises. It is just quite bad because the canal
was really nice, but then it kind of spoils it because of all the traf<U+FB01>c
noises and stuff.’’ (Child F 8yrs, G1:P3)

It is evident that sights, sounds, smells, and kinaesthetic aspects

of speed and <U+FB02>ow often contribute to creating a rich experience of

the cycling environment, and this corporeal pleasure attained from
cycling provides some of the strongest reasons that families enjoy

their rides together. The <U+FB01>ndings above demonstrate that under-
standing the sensory experience of cycling is important in consid-

ering how infrastructure might be better designed to provide a

pleasant, engaging, and attractive environment in which to ride.


3.1.2. The role of novelty in cycling

The importance of novelty in the experience of cycle routes was

highlighted by several participants. The very act of cycling itself

provided a relatively new experience for both the adults and the

children who did not cycle often. Novelty for more experienced
cyclists had to come in different forms, for example it could be pro-

vided by changes due to engineering work, or the ever-changing

views throughout the seasons; appreciation of this novelty was

made possible by the relatively slow speeds of the cycle ride.

‘‘You have got the canal on one side and the river on the other side
as well, so quite often you are cycling between the water on both
of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61                                        57
sides which is nice. There’s lots of things to look at and they have
been doing work on the canal so it was interesting to see. We
hadn’t been for a while so there were lots of changes’’ (Adult F,
G1:P3)

3.1.3. The role of destinations in the journey

Getting participants to document their route through photo-

graphs, sketches and video highlighted the importance of the activ-
ities for which families stopped along their route. These activities
either constituted the destination of the ride, or were different
places at which the family stopped along the course of the cycle.
Sometimes these activities were provided by the natural

environment:

‘‘There’s this stream that runs alongside the cycle tracks. Any time
we just saw a good place to paddle, we just stopped and paddled.
So yes, it’s very fun’’ (Child F 10yrs, G2:P3)

For many of the participants their more regular experiences of
cycling were constituted by functional trips, in which cycling and
the cycle paths they utilised were a means of reaching their desti-
nation, as opposed to being ‘‘the destination’’ per-se.
‘‘I don’t know how I feel about cycling for cycling’s sake; not going
anywhere in particular. We don’t do a lot of this kind of cycling; we
generally use our bikes as transport to get somewhere. We have to
go to a tea shop or pub to make it feel more ended and purposeful’’
(Adult F, G1:P3)
Having a reason for the cycle appeared to give a kind of valida-
tion to the family cycle, within which the participants could then
enjoy the actual experience of cycling together. Particularly for
younger children (aged 9 and under), having a destination (or sev-

eral destinations) was important as it spurred them along on long-

er rides, provided points of rest along a route, and gave them

something to aim for.

‘‘I don’t really like just cycling; I prefer cycling to a destination.
When we got to Stonehouse, the place where we got biscuits, I
thought that was good because it was a destination to get to, but
we didn’t have to get there quickly’’ (Child F 8yrs, G1:P3)

Halfway stops at pubs or picnic grounds or other points along a
route were frequently described as a positive part of the experi-
ence. These would often provide a form of reward for the exertions
of the cycle, and provided a frame within which to set the experi-
ence. At other times, participants would stop at points of particular

interest, often to explore the natural environment or to enjoy the

scenery.


3.2. Barriers to family cycling


Despite there being a great deal of positive discussion about the

experience of cycling together as a family, nonetheless the <U+FB01>ndings

show that there are several barriers which can outweigh the plea-
surable experiential aspects and discourage parents from taking

children out on their bikes as much as they would like to. These

barriers are centred on con<U+FB01>dence in cycling, both in terms of

safety (road and personal) and knowledge of the norms and struc-

tures associated with cycling and its immediate environment.


3.2.1. Con<U+FB01>dence – safety and skills

Concern for children’s safety when cycling on roads was a

recurrent theme throughout all of the interviews; it was something

which had a strong negative effect on the experience of cycling
together as a family. Traf<U+FB01>c was the key issue when parents
discussed the safety of themselves and the children when cycling

58                                            W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite / Journal
together. Several of the parents felt that when taking children out
on their bikes roads were not an option as there was too great a
risk.

‘‘I haven’t really been cycling for years, so I think it’s con<U+FB01>dence as

well, you know? I suppose because I’m older and I’ve got young kids

I’m more aware of the dif<U+FB01>culties that cyclists can have, but I think

it’s de<U+FB01>nitely con<U+FB01>dence and I wouldn’t let the kids cycle around
here’’ (Adult F, G3:P1)

If adults were not con<U+FB01>dent on their bikes, then this would lead

to them being less likely to cycle with the children, which in turn

would result in the children themselves being less con<U+FB01>dent. Par-
ents felt responsible for their children’s levels of con<U+FB01>dence in cy-
cling on the roads, and also that the children had the proper cycling
skills to support this.
‘‘It’s copying isn’t it; if they [the children] can see we’re nervous
they’re going to think ‘well, why are you nervous? Should I be ner-
vous?’ So Janice [mother] and I are con<U+FB01>dent cyclists and we go out
with our children on the roads to expose them to that so they’re
exposed under our guidance’’ (Adult F, G2:P1)

Parts of the cycle network which were on-road were also
deemed to be unsafe, despite having dedicated cycle lanes.

‘‘The trouble is, the National Cycle Network is great, but to go as far
as we’d like sometimes, a lot of it is road. (. . .) Bristol is deemed as
the <U+FB01>rst Cycling City, a lot of money went into it, but a lot of it was
painting a line on a road. You think, ‘yes, that’s okay, but not for
children’’’ (Adult F, G1:P1)

This meant that families would sometimes not access off-road
NCN routes which could only be reached by cycling on sections

of on-road cycle path.

Of importance to children was that parents were concerned
about allowing children to cycle alone. Children at the ages of 11

and 12 in the school focus groups were very aware of not being al-

lowed to cycle places, despite wanting to. As parents did allow

their children to cycle independently, it was often to certain dis-

tinct places, for example to and from school, to the park, to the lo-

cal village centre, and often short journeys between friends’ homes,

‘‘I can go a short distance though, on my own, I can, I can go round
a friend’s home and to the park’’ (Year 7, M, focus group)

Almost all the journeys children were allowed to do coincided
with a de<U+FB01>nite place or activity at the end, hence the importance
of destination again; they were far less likely to be allowed to go
off exploring on their bike. As children got older, they began to
want to use the bike for more adventurous purposes and the year
7 and especially year 8 children felt they were ready, but under-
stood their parents’ concerns which mainly lay around road safety.

‘‘I mean, we all want to cycle, right. It’s often parents won’t let us.

‘Stranger danger’ and the cars. They don’t think it’s safe’’ (Year 7, F,

focus group)

They all felt this would change in a few years’ time as well, as
they got older and were very much looking forward to their inde-
pendence that the bicycle would afford them.

3.2.2. Con<U+FB01>dence – knowledge
Another main barrier linked to con<U+FB01>dence was a lack of knowl-
edge about the cycle paths in the area, and a perceived lack of
information about where to cycle. Some of the comments related
to a lack of information that would allow people to plan cycle trips,
such as information provided by local authorities and cycling
organisations.
of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61
‘‘I think just some cycle routes, just some suggestions of cycle routes
that we could do with a focus, that’s what I would love to do. Since
we’ve lived here [seven years] I know that there’s some kind of
cycle track in the Forest of Dean, but that’s all I know. I’ve never

gone there and it’s just a vague notion really. I’m always kind of

trying to <U+FB01>nd things out, but practically it just seems too hard’’

(Adult F, G3:P1)

Two of the parents discussed the sense of a ‘missed opportunity’
to provide information on the ways in which local attractions,

shops, and services could be accessed by the cycle path. Extra site

or context-speci<U+FB01>c detail was sometimes desired but lacking.

‘‘[There needs to be] better signposting, I do think the signposting is
poor. It took me a while to <U+FB01>gure out how the path connects’’
(Adult M, G1:P1)
‘‘There’s loads of history around that way. People go ‘what’s that?’
And they don’t know because there’s nothing to tell them’’ (Adult
M, G2:P1)

The sketches, photographs and annotated maps suggested that
legitimacy of the route for cycling was important. For example,
the importance of having signs to indicate that cyclists were indeed
on a cycle path was reassuring and gave families con<U+FB01>dence in the
fact that they were ‘on the right track’. In the interviews with more
experienced cycling families, there was discussion about how their
personal knowledge of cycle paths and routes in-and-around their
local area was seen to reduce the need for ‘‘of<U+FB01>cial’’ information
and designated cycle routes. Several of the participants explained
that they cycled extensively on a daily basis, and yet were relatively
unaware of the details regarding NCN designated cycle paths.


3.3. Exploring how games and leisure activities might encourage

cycling


To explore the potential bene<U+FB01>ts of experiential improvements

to the cycling environment, families were asked how the creation

or facilitation of games and other incidental leisure activities along

the course of the cycle network might enhance their cycling expe-

rience. Participants generally saw games as something that they

themselves would want to create in the spaces provided for such
activity. They suggested, for example, placing dedicated infrastruc-
ture from which games might be developed, including ramps, bars,
off-road tracks and similar. Games can enhance the positive as-
pects of cycling; they can create spaces to maximise the kinaes-
thetic experiences, to embed novelty, and make a series of
destinations. Games can help overcome some of the barriers by
improving con<U+FB01>dence in skills and by legitimising cycling space,
making it accessible for families.

3.3.1. Enhancing the kinaesthetic experience
Games can help encourage kinaesthetic elements of cycling, such

as places for swooping down hills, banking round corners, gliding

along under the shade of trees, and racing against one other could

occur. There was a discussion of how cycle networks like the NCN
could be improved if there were ‘alternate routes’ immediately adja-
cent to the cycle path which could facilitate more playful cycling.
‘‘It would be good to have one part which is a nice straight track,
and then a little bit up the left-hand side or whatever; where
there’s a little bit of jumps and bumps and all that sort of thing.
They’d love it’’ (Adult M, G2:P1)

It was felt that such additions might be a motivator for children to
use cycle networks more frequently and independently, to use it for
fun as opposed to simply for access, and even making the cycle path a
destination in its own right. The rationale behind these suggestions

W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite / Journal
stemmed from the fact that the children interviewed would often re-
quest to go cycling in local parks, woods, and commons, and these
would often have such features and would be exciting places to go
and cycle in their own right. These actually stemmed from the adults
observation of the child’s enjoyment and the relief that it took away
the persuasion needed to get the child cycling,

‘‘If you had, like, bumps along there and bits that you could whizz

along, I think you would be more tempted to just go, ‘well, let’s go

for a gentle cycle ride’. You’d probably be more likely to go along

with your friends, wouldn’t you? Because where you do like to
go, boys, what you really like is the common, because there are lots
of little dippies up on the common. It’s the pure fun of it isn’t it?’’
(Adult M, G2:P3)
‘‘Yes yes yes!’’ (Child M 9yrs, in response to above)
‘‘It’s them saying they want to go, so I’m not having to persuade
them; not having to cajole them or anything like that’’ (Adult F,
in response to above)

These <U+FB01>ndings are useful in explaining how cycle paths might

be re-conceptualised or engineered to create a more playful aspect

to cycle rides for families, tap into children’s desires for and excit-

ing sensory experience of using their bikes. In addition, it helps

make cycle paths somewhere to go, as opposed to simply something

to use – and children hoped it might help encourage their parents

to see them as a legitimate space for recreation, as say children

might in the park, shifting the focus from movement-based to

place-based infrastructure. This, however, would probably be

dependent on access from home or school to the cycle path was

considered safe by parents.

Children discussed how when they did use such spaces, for

example at BMX parks they changed the games they played fre-

quently. The equipment was designed in such a way that many dif-

ferent games could be played as an individual and within a group.

Hence, there is potential to retain the novelty of the space.


3.3.2. Improving skills in cycling: bicycle challenges (skills and

con<U+FB01>dence)

Several participants suggested that challenges could be placed

on cycle paths which aimed to help children (and sometimes

adults) practise and improve their cycling pro<U+FB01>ciency, whilst also

being enjoyable. For example, participants explained that it would

be useful to have cycle training features built into infrastructure of

the cycle network, which could allow both adults and children to

practise their bike-handling skills in a safe, off-road setting – help-

ing increase their con<U+FB01>dence and encouraging them to cycle more

together. This is linked to earlier <U+FB01>ndings concerning perceptions

of safety and the link between this and con<U+FB01>dence when cycling

as a family. The suggestions from one family included having

embedded challenges or enjoyable activities which improved skills

in changing gears, cycling at speed, taking corners, braking, cycling

no-handed, manoeuvring (slalom), and balance. Again, participants

described this in terms of an infrastructure change that would then

encourage practise to take place in an enjoyable and informal set-

ting. A participant explained that there was a ‘bike skills’ area at

the end of one of their local cycle paths (which had since been re-

moved), and that this was something which the children enjoyed

using and which they would like to see more of.

‘‘At the end they’ve got like a sort of bike skill thing. That would be
fun to have a bit more of that’’ (Child F 11yrs, G1:P3)


3.3.3. Con<U+FB01>dence: legitimising and signposting the experience
Extra signage is needed to legitimise the space, simply to allow
cyclists to know they are supposed to be there, as much as to
of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61                                    59
way<U+FB01>nd. It was suggested these could be in the form of signpost
displays in the cycle infrastructure and encourage the exploration
of the environment around the cycle path, delivering information
about the local area. For example, these could include elements
of history and information about the local <U+FB02>ora and fauna. Within
this suggestion however there was an understanding that too
much change to the infrastructure could negatively affect the local

environment, spoil the experience of the natural areas bordering

cycle paths, and be counterproductive to encouraging exploration

and enjoyment of a route.

‘‘But then again, you don’t want to take away from it. You don’t
want to have like big information posters up because it takes away
from the feel. It needs balance’’ (Adult F, G2:P3)

4. Discussion

The <U+FB01>ndings demonstrate that connectivity is important in po-
sitive cycling experiences. Participants like to feel connected to the

environment through which they are moving, as well as feeling

connected to the movement and propulsion itself. Cycling provides

a unique sensory experience, and the act of cycling itself – the feel-

ing of movement; the sights, smells, and sounds – was often the

main reason that the participants (especially the children) enjoyed

it. Taylor (2003, p. 1617) describes the pleasure of cycling as ‘a

sense of exhilaration, or pure delight, in just experiencing motion

without strain or struggle’. Therefore there is a need not to disturb

or displace this fundamental ‘delight’ of being in the saddle. Tradi-

tionally, the more intangible, experiential elements of cycling have

been ignored in research in favour of instrumental analyses of how

and why people travel on bikes (Spinney, 2009). However, more

recently there have been efforts to explore the kinaesthetic and

sensory experience of cycling from a range of perspectives (see:

Aldred, 2010; Horton et al., 2007; Spinney, 2006, 2009; Taylor,

2003).
Participants suggested that pleasurable kinaesthetic and sen-

sory experiences of cycling could be further facilitated through

providing playful space for – or simply encouraging – ‘fun cycling’

along the cycle path. Enhancing the infrastructure of the cycle net-

work to create playful spaces could have the potential to assist in

reducing some barriers to its use. The main barriers to cycling

which families experienced were issues of safety and knowledge,

both relating to con<U+FB01>dence in use of the bicycle. Knowledge is an

area of concern for participants, with a sense of not knowing areas

in which they are legitimately allowed to cycle, cycling norms and

behaviour, and potential areas that are worth exploring. Changing

the infrastructure can legitimise space for family cycling, improv-

ing con<U+FB01>dence of cyclists through the placing of signs, bars, and

ramps – inviting cyclists to use the route. In addition, space to gain

con<U+FB01>dence is provided. The issue of con<U+FB01>dence on bikes amongst

both children and adults is heavily entwined with perceptions of

freedom. The <U+FB01>ndings suggest that learning skills and gaining con-

<U+FB01>dence from parents is an important aspect of children wanting to

cycle. If adults are not con<U+FB01>dent on bikes then it was generally ac-

cepted that their children would be far less likely to be exposed to

cycling or to have the opportunity to learn from their parents. In

this sense there is a vicious circle of low con<U+FB01>dence being passed

down from parent to child, and there is merit in providing a desig-
nated, playful space in which parents and children can develop
such skills. However, the wider barriers to cycling remain, espe-
cially if the cycle network remains disconnected and cycling on
roads continues. Hence, creating playful spaces by enhancing the
off-road cycle network does not reduce the need for lowering
speed limits and formalised training for cyclists and indeed other
road users.

60                                        W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite / Journal
Riders’ delight in motion sets cycling apart from other forms of
travel, especially motorised modes, where there is an emphasis on
creating a cocoon to shelter the traveller from their moving
environment: either in the ever-more luxurious interiors of cars,
or the increasingly high-speci<U+FB01>cation trains, coaches, and buses –
with air conditioning and Wi-Fi keeping the traveller entertained
and comfortable, and sound muf<U+FB02>ers and shock absorbers keeping
the outside world well away. The disparity between motorised
travel and cycling is worthy of further investigation. In what situ-
ations or contexts do people prefer one extreme or the other? Does
lifestage make a difference? Do the family groups in this research
collectively experience the children’s need or desire for kinaesthet-
ic or sensory experiences, or does this wane with age? Children
liked to have a destination, and this contained an element of
excitement and adventure – the destination giving the journey
purpose but the journey also adding meaning to reaching the des-
tination. It is possible that this becomes less important with age as
the destinations of travel become increasingly routinized and
familiar – travelling to work, to the shops, on the school run: the
quotidian nature of travel may make an exciting or novel experi-
ence of cycling less realistic. It can be surmised that as people
age, in general, their desire for kinaesthetic or sensory feedback
changes from the literal, yet the need to feel connected does not
diminish, and cycle infrastructure needs to also support this. Inter-
estingly in later life, as people physically cannot get out and about
as frequently as when younger, older people often lament the pass-
ing of travel for its own sake, rather than as a by-product for reach-
ing a destination; thus highlighting the intrinsic signi<U+FB01>cance of
travel and movement (Andrews et al., 2012; Musselwhite and
Haddad, 2010; Musselwhite and Shergold, 2013).
Hence, it could be the link between travel, work, and daily rou-
tine in middle-life that causes a natural desire for the travel itself
to be an exhilarating experience to be surpassed by the desire for
it to be one of comfort. It is important to consider these differences,
because any national cycle network needs to consider how it might
cater for (and indeed encourage) a broad variety of users. Creating
playful spaces to enhance the kinaesthetic and sensory elements of
cycling, allow for the practise of skills, and facilitate a growth of
con<U+FB01>dence needs to be carefully done so as not to create physical
and psychological barriers for cyclists with different needs. For
example, developing playful spaces may become a physical barrier
for those wanting to cycle smoothly: those cycling to work or to
the shops. It may also be a barrier to those who suffer physical dis-
comfort from cycling on uneven surfaces. Hence, any playful space
must be created in addition to existing infrastructure, without
upsetting the smooth continuity of the cycle network. Even when
this is the case, creating playful spaces may re-emphasise that cy-
cling is the preserve of children, the young or something to be done
for sport or leisure and hence not a serious or legitimate mode of
transport, which is another well-known barrier to wider adoption
of cycling (see Gatersleben and Haddad, 2010). Nonetheless, the re-
search does emphasise the importance of creating a pleasant envi-
ronment within which to cycle and suggests the extension of off
road cycling network, away from elements that negatively impact
on the kinaesthetic and sensory cycling environment, for example
motorised traf<U+FB01>c.
With speci<U+FB01>c regard to the children interviewed, there is some
subtle evidence of age and gender differences in the views put for-
ward. As children age, their desire to utilise the independence
afforded by cycling increases, in terms of it allowing them to go
off and explore with friends, or travel to school by themselves.
Regarding gender, girls tended to discuss the aesthetic elements
of the cycle ride more frequently than boys, particularly making
reference to pleasant visual, aural, and olfactory aspects of the
environment. Both girls and boys discussed the thrilling experi-
ences created by jumps, bumps, and speed; however boys focussed
of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61
on these elements more singularly and consistently, and they often
formed the main motivations for boys to cycle – where girls’ moti-
vations were more holistic. Traditionally research suggests boys
are more likely than girls to enjoy risk-taking on bikes and enjoy
the thrill of riding (e.g. Briem et al., 2004). However, the utilisation
of a variety of research methods in this research has highlighted
that girls enjoyed that aspect just as much as boys did, but also
girls had a wider appreciation of other aspects of cycling, including
the way in which bicycle acted as a nexus between themselves and
the local environment. Additional gender differences in motivation
for and enjoyment of cycling did not surface amongst the children.
Previous research suggests boys are more likely to cycle and
hold positive attitudes towards cycling when compared to girls,
but these differences tend to occur in senior school age – from
11 or 12 years and above (e.g. Moore, 2009; Thorne, 2002). This
suggests that there is currently a missed opportunity to maintain
and encourage the positive attitudes to cycling discussed by the
girls in this study as they move from childhood to adolescence
and greater independence – where existing research suggests that
their af<U+FB01>nity may tail off. The <U+FB01>ndings of this study demonstrate
that both girls and boys would value experiential enhancements
to infrastructure on cycle routes, and there is an argument that
in any investment in experiential improvements it would be perti-
nent to place particular emphasis on capturing and retaining girls’
enthusiasm for using the NCN.
Further research is needed on the potential impact of any such
infrastructural changes on different groups of cyclists. It could be
that in creating playful cycling spaces it further emphasises the
stereotypical view that cycling is for children, the young, for leisure
or for sport – and harm perceptions of the utilitarian rationale for
cycling as a legitimate means of access. In this sense, further
research is required which would examine any potential tensions
between playful cycling spaces which encourage cycling from a
young age and reconnect parents with the cycle network, and the
core functional infrastructure of the NCN that allows the smooth,
speedy <U+FB02>ow of cycles necessary for those using cycle paths as a
means of access.


5. Conclusions

With regards to increasing levels of cycling over a longer term,
it can be seen that investment in infrastructural enhancements
such as these which aim to encourage, bolster, and maintain chil-
dren’s interest in cycling could arguably be an important aspect of
future improvements to cycle networks, and in securing the ‘‘next
generation’’ of cyclists. Coupled with this is the potential for such
improvements to have a collective bene<U+FB01>t for the family group.
The best way of achieving this would be to offer experiential infra-
structure changes, such as placing bars, ramps, or jumps adjacent
to the cycle network, which would enable any innovation around
the ways in which playfulness can be created during cycle rides
to stem from cyclists themselves. Such playful cycling spaces for
enjoyment, family time, skills practise, and con<U+FB01>dence-building
have the potential to have a positive in<U+FB02>uence on both children
and adults.
However, within the context of wider investment in cycle infra-
structure, spaces for more playful activities will not be of value to
all cyclists, and those using the cycle network for commuting or
other more utilitarian purposes may see little bene<U+FB01>t from such
enhancements. Undoubtedly the main focus of investment in
cycling infrastructure in the short term needs to remain on
improving the safety of the network and building high-quality,
acceptable cycle lanes and routes for all users. That is not to say
that enhancing the environment of the cycle network is of no
value: many participants felt that different types of additional

W. Clayton, C. Musselwhite / Journal
infrastructure or embedded challenge could enrich the cycling

experience. As such, it is suggested placing enhanced infrastruc-

ture and challenges alongside and in addition to the current cycle
network could be considered as an innovative addition to any tool-
kit of measures aimed at encouraging travel behaviour change

from a number of different angles.

References


Aldred, R., 2010. ‘On the outside’: constructing cycling citizenship. Social & Cultural
Geography 11 (1), 35–52.

Andrews, G., Parkhurst, G., Susilo, Y.O., Shaw, J., 2012. The grey escape: investigating
older people’s use of the free bus pass. Transportation Planning and Technology
35 (1), 3–15.
Aronson, J., 1994. A pragmatic view of thematic analysis. The Qualitative Report
2(1).           <http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/BackIssues/QR2-1/aronson.html>

(accessed 23.04.13).
Bannister, C., 1988. Travel to Work Patterns in England and Wales for Pedestrian
and Cyclists – Their Policy Implications. Occasional Paper, University of
Manchester, Department of Planning and Landscape.
Bickerstaff, K., Shaw, S., 2000. Evaluation of the Walking Bus at Pirehill First School.

Staffordshire: The Centre for Alternative and Sustainable Transport (CAST),
Staffordshire University 2000.
Briem, V., Radeborg, K., Salo, I., Bengtsson, H., 2004. Developmental aspects of
children’s behavior and safety while cycling. Journal of Pediatric Psychology 29
(5), 369–377.

Cahill, M., Ruben, T., Winn, S., 1996. Children and Transport: Travel Patterns,
Attitudes and Leisure Activities of Children in the Brighton Area. University of

Brighton, Health and Social Policy Research Centre, Brighton.
Carnall, D., 2001. Cycling and health promotion. British Medical Journal 320, 888.
Cavill, N., Davis, A., 2007. Cycling and Health. What’s the Evidence? Cycling England,
London.
Cavill, N., Kahlmeier, S., Racioppi, F. (Eds.), 2006. Physical Activity and Health in

Europe: Evidence for Action. WHO Regional Of<U+FB01>ce for Europe, Copenhagen.
Davies, D., Gray, S., Gardner, G., Harland, G., 2001. A Quantitative Study of Attitudes
of Individuals to Cycling. TRL Report 481. TRL, Crowthorne.
Durand, C.P., Andalib, M., Dunton, G.F., Wolch, J., Pentz, M.A., 2011. A systematic
review of built environment factors related to physical activity and obesity risk:

implications for smart growth urban planning. Obesity Review 12, e173–e182.
Eggenberger, S.K., Nelms, T.P., 2007. Family interviews as a method for family

research. Journal of Advanced Nursing 58, 282–292.
Fraser, S.D., Lock, K., 2010. Cycling for transport and public health: a systematic
review of the effect of the environment on cycling. European Journal of Public
Health 8, 1–6.
Gatersleben, B., Haddad, H., 2010. Who is the typical bicyclist? Transportation

Research, Part F 13, 41–48.
Hodgson, F., 2011. Structures of encounterability: space, place, paths and identities.
In: Grieco, M., Urry, J. (Eds.), 2011 Mobilities: New Perspectives on Transport
and Society. Ashgate, Farnham, pp. 41–64.
Horton, D., Rosen, P., Cox, P., 2007. Cycling and Society. Ashgate, Aldershot, UK.
Jay, T., Mahdjoubi, L., Greene, L., Walton, K., 2009. A Toolkit for the Evaluation of
Routes and Public Artworks with Young People. Unpublished.
of Transport Geography 33 (2013) 54–61                                                       61
Jones, H., Chatterjee, K., Gray, S., 2012. Understanding walking and cycling using
life-course perspective. In: Proceedings of the 91st Annual Meeting of the

Transport Research Board, January.
Krizek, K.J., Roland, R.W., 2005. What is at the end of the road? Understanding
discontinuities of on-street bicycle lanes in urbansettings. Transportation
Research, Part D 10, 55–68.
Krizek, K.J., El-Geneidy, A., Thompson, K., 2007. A detailed analysis of how an urban
trail system affects cyclists’ travel. Transportation 34, 611–624.
Lorenc, T., Brunton, G., Oliver, S., Oliver, K., Oakley, A., 2008. Attitudes to walking
and cycling among children, young people and parents: a systematic review.
Journal of Epidemiology Community Health 62, 852–857.
McClintock, H., Cleary, J., 1996. Cycle facilities and cyclists’ safety. Transport Policy
3 (1), 67–77.

McMillan, T.E., 2007. The relative in<U+FB02>uence of urban form on a child’s travel mode to
school. Transportation Research Part A 41 (1), 69–79.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis. Sage Publications Ltd.,
London.
Moore, J., 2009. Merseyside cycle training evaluation. In: Cycling & Society

Symposium, Bolton 6th September, 2009. University of Bolton.
Musselwhite, C.B.A., Haddad, H., 2010. Mobility, accessibility and quality of later
life. Quality in Ageing and Older Adults 11 (1), 25–37.
Musselwhite, C.B.A., Shergold, I., 2013. Examining the process of driving cessation in
later life. European Journal of Ageing 10 (2), 89–100.

Nankervis, M., 1999. The effects of weather and climate on bicycle commuting.
Transportation Research Part A 33, 417–431.
Newby, L., 1993. On the Right Tracks: Cycle Planning Best Practice and Its Potential
in Leicester. Research Report No. 3. Best Practice Research Unit. Leicester
Environment City Trust, Leicester.

Pulcher, J., Buehler, R., 2010. Walking and cycling for healthy cities. Built
Environment 36 (4), 391–414.

Silverman, D., 2001. Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for Analysing Talk, Text
and Interaction, second ed. Sage Publications, London.
Spinney, J., 2006. A place of sense: a kinaesthetic ethnography of cyclists on Mont
Ventoux. Environment and Planning D 24 (5), 709.
Spinney, J., 2009. Cycling the city: movement, meaning and method. Geography

Compass 3 (2), 817–835.
Taylor, N., 2003. The aesthetic experience of traf<U+FB01>c in the modern city. Urban
Studies 40 (8), 1609.
TfL, 2009. (Transport for London). Motivating the Near Market About Cycling.
Research by 2CV for TfL.

Thorne, B., 2002. Chapter 36: Do girls and boys have different cultures? In: Jackson,
S., Scott, S. (Eds.) Gender: A Sociological Reader London. Routledge.

Timperio, A., Crawford, D., Telford, A., Salmon, J., 2004. Perceptions about the local
neighborhood and walking and cycling among children. Preventive Medicine 38
(1), 47.
Tyrrell, H., 2000 Going My Way: What Children and Young People Say About
Transport. Save the Children Scotland, Edinburgh.

Welleman, T., 1997. The Dutch bicycle master plan 1990–96. In: Tolley, R. (Ed.), The
Greening of Urban Transport. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, pp. 177–190.
Wen, L.M., Fry, D., Rissel, C., Dirkis, H., Balafas, A., Merom, D., 2008. Factors
associated with children being driven to school: implications for walk to school
programs. Health Education Research 23, 325–334.



