

ARTICLE IN PRESS
Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transport Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tranpol
Walking school buses in the Auckland region: A longitudinal assessment
Damian Collins a, Robin A. Kearns b,
a
Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta, Canada
b
School of Geography, Geology and Environmental Science, University of Auckland, 10 Symonds Street, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand
a r t i c l e in fo                                   abstract
Available online 28 July 2009                         This article examines the development of walking school buses (WSBs) in Auckland, New Zealand,
Keywords:                                             drawing on <U+FB01>ve annual surveys. Longitudinal analysis reveals sustained growth in the number of routes,
Walking school bus                                    and in levels of participation, although activity remains concentrated in the wealthiest neighbourhoods.
New Zealand                                           Parent coordinators identify four key bene<U+FB01>ts to WSBs: the sense of community, opportunity for
Walking                                               exercise/health promotion, reduction in car use and local congestion, and reduced injury risk for child
Active travel                                         pedestrians. We contend that this form of supervised walking challenges some of the social practices
associated with automobile dependence at the same time as it reinforces others.
& 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights re
1. Introduction                                                                          government in an effort to reduce car travel to schools by 10%
(Lang, 2007).
Walking school buses (WSBs) provide an opportunity for                                  Speci<U+FB01>cally, of the primary schools in the Auckland region that
children to walk to and from school in an adult-supervised,                              currently have a school travel plan, 42% incorporate a WSB. This
timetabled and structured manner (Kearns and Collins, 2003;                              said, the WSB initiative was often adopted prior to the develop-
Kearns et al., 2003; Mackett et al., 2003). The potential advantages                     ment of such plans, and many schools with WSBs (around one
of the initiative include reduced levels of parental chauffeuring,                       third of the total) have yet to implement one. As Mackett et al.
less traf<U+FB01>c congestion in the vicinity of primary schools at peak                        (2003, p. 179) note in the English context, because WSBs can be
times and increased routine physical activity for children and                           ‘‘set up on the initiative of parents or others associated with a
parent volunteers alike. The focus of this article is on the                             school’’, formal governmental input/direction is not necessarily
development of WSBs in Auckland, New Zealand (population:                                required. Nevertheless, ARTA supports WSBs in Auckland through
1.4 million) between 2002 and 2006. It draws upon surveys                                the employment of a Regional WSB Coordinator, and the provision
conducted at the end of each school year, the design and analysis                        of <U+FB01>nancial support – including start-up grants of up to $1500 per
of which was a collaborative project involving the authors, and the                      route (NZD) and (from 2004) operating grants of $200 per year,
Auckland Regional Transport Authority (ARTA), the regional                               subject to timely completion of the surveys that inform this
government body responsible for transport issues. The questions                          article.
and methods informing the reports have developed alongside the                               Our research into Auckland WSBs is broadly longitudinal, in
WSB initiative itself, but in combination the <U+FB01>ve annual reports                         the sense that the approach to data collection, and the particular
provide the foundation for our assessment.                                               questions posed in surveys, varied somewhat from year-to-year –
In New Zealand, the WSB idea, <U+FB01>rst proposed by Engwicht                             re<U+FB02>ecting the evolving knowledge and interests of both the
(1993), was initially adopted in the South Island city of                                researchers and ARTA – but the guiding objective remained to
Christchurch (Kingham and Ussher, 2005). Subsequently, the                               understand changes, successes and challenges in regional adop-
initiative diffused to a number of other cities, including Auckland,                     tion of the initiative. In the <U+FB01>rst 2 years of our study, data were
the country’s major metropolitan centre, where it <U+FB02>ourished and                          collected by telephone interview. In 2002, we sought to contact
become <U+FB01>rmly embedded in policy. Walking is of<U+FB01>cially promoted                           the principals of all Auckland primary schools at which WSBs
in Auckland as ‘‘a preferred travel choice for shorter journeys’’                        operated, and also the parent coordinator of each route (the
(ARTA, 2008). WSBs feature prominently in the region’s travel                            person responsible for its day-to-day management, including the
demand management initiative, TravelWise, and are a relatively                           scheduling of adult volunteers). The following year we contacted
common strategy in the school travel plans promoted by regional                          parent coordinators alone. In 2004, we used a self-completion
questionnaire for the <U+FB01>rst time. These were sent to the parent
coordinators of all known WSBs, and response was linked to a
 Corresponding author. Tel.: +64 9 373 7599x88442; fax: +64 9 373 7434.              $200 grant (an ARTA initiative, organized independent of the
E-mail address: r.kearns@auckland.ac.nz (R.A. Kearns).                              researchers). This approach was repeated in 2005 and 2006, with
0967-070X/$ - see front matter & 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2009.06.003



















served.




































ARTICLE IN PRES
2                                                D. Collins, R.A. Kearns
the questionnaire largely unchanged. Response rates over the <U+FB01>ve
assessments averaged around two-thirds of all coordinators, and
peaked at 79% with the most recent survey. This very high rate
re<U+FB02>ects both the monetary incentive to respond, and coordinators’
existing stake in WSBs.
While the reports focussed on the Auckland context, they also
have a broader signi<U+FB01>cance. The WSB initiative has become
increasingly widespread, especially within Australia, New Zealand
the United Kingdom, and has attracted academic, media and
policy interest. Moreover, the imperatives that have helped to
‘‘drive’’ enthusiasm for WSBs – such as preventing child
pedestrian injury, enhancing physical activity, reducing car-
dependence, and increasing social cohesion – appear to have
become more pressing over time. By way of example, a recent
column by George Monbiot, a prominent British environmentalist
and social critic, reminds us that ‘‘[d]eath and injury on the roads
is the world’s most neglected public health issue’’ and that ‘‘[t]he
highest death rate is among children walking on the roads.’’ He
suggests that ongoing efforts to address these issues solely
through ‘‘better training for drivers and better safety for children’’
are unlikely to work, and are promoted in part because they ‘‘do
not interfere with the commercial interests of the transport
industry’’ (Monbiot, 2007). While WSBs do not pose a particularly
direct challenge to the dominance of the automobile (Collins and
Kearns, 2005), they may reduce familial car use and localized
congestion around schools, and contribute to normalizing walking
as a form of daily mobility for neighbourhood-level journeys.
This article provides a longitudinal overview of the WSB
phenomenon, as it has unfolded in Auckland. First, we provide a
summary of existing research into WSBs, and the broader
literature on children’s mobility of which it is part. Then, we
present our analysis organized around six key themes: the growth
of WSBs and the broad characteristics of their day-to-day
operation; the sustainability of WSBs as volunteer-driven initia-
tives; the bene<U+FB01>ts of WSB activity as perceived by adult
coordinators; the disciplined nature of WSB activity; the gendered
nature of WSBs; and participants’ observations of the urban
environment.


2. Changing trends in children’s mobility: the place of WSBs

Children’s experiences of the journeys between home and
school have changed signi<U+FB01>cantly in recent decades, due in
particular to increased car use (often as part of a parent’s multi-
purpose trip), and substantial decreases in independent walking
(Pooley et al., 2005). Trends towards both chauffeuring and
parental supervision of active travel have been granted momen-
tum by long-standing, but accentuating, concerns for road safety
and stranger danger, and by the increasingly complex scheduling
of day-to-day life. Nevertheless, walking to school has not
disappeared; indeed, Pooley et al. (2005) found that it remains
the most common travel mode for pupils in Britain. Independent
walking, in particular, continues to be viewed positively by many
children by virtue of the opportunities it presents for socialization
and independence.
An increasing dependence on the automobile for everyday
journeys has led not only to a partial retreat of children from
public space in many Western cities, but also to a more
fundamental restructuring of children’s lives (Barker, 2003).
While this restructuring should not be considered entirely
negative, it has come at a price. This price includes a signi<U+FB01>cant
risk of injury for remaining child pedestrians and cyclists, and
diminished opportunities to explore urban spaces, especially
independent of adult supervision. Children themselves are often
aware of the ways in which their lives are constrained by fear, and
S
/ Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8
many savour opportunities to explore outdoor environments
when these are presented (Mitchell et al., 2007). Given the
relatively short distances between home and primary school for
most children in cities such as Auckland, daily travel between
these two sites offers an important opportunity for routine active
travel, and exploration of the local environment (Neuwelt and
Kearns, 2006).
Another variable shaping school travel is urban form. McMillan
(2007) found that factors like the patterning and density of streets
are important in<U+FB02>uences on parents’ choice of travel mode,
alongside other issues such as perceived neighbourhood safety
and sociodemographics. In addition, factors that have received
little attention in travel choice literature, such as attitudes
towards modal choice, caregiver country of birth and perceptions
of vehicle speeds, were also found to be signi<U+FB01>cant (McMillan,
2007). It follows from such <U+FB01>ndings that efforts to bring about
major shifts in school travel behaviour will likely need to be very
broad-based.
Although school travel behaviour is typically understood to be
determined by parents, children can also express strong views on
alternate travel modes (Barker, 2003). One Auckland survey of
primary school children found walking to be the most popular
travel mode, and that many pupils who were chauffeured would
prefer an active form of travel (Collins and Kearns, 2001). In some
contexts, such preferences may help to explain the endurance of
walking for journeys between home and school.
One such environment is Fife, Scotland, where Ross (2007)
found a majority of children continued to negotiate this journey
independently, and on foot. Community networks of support and
belonging reassured children and reduced parental safety con-
cerns. Critically, these networks were often developed and
maintained through children’s independent travel in their local
environment. Elsewhere, Boarnet et al. (2005) investigated the
frequency of active commuting in schools in California, where
infrastructure for active travel (such as pedestrian crossing
improvements and bicycle paths) had recently been completed
under a legislated programme. Children who travelled past the
new projects on their journey to school were more likely to
increase their active commuting to school compared with other
neighbourhood children. Notwithstanding the diverse contexts of
these studies, in sum they show that many children generally
want to walk, and that social networks as well as improvements to
urban form can support children’s walking.
Over the last 15 years, WSBs have been adopted and adapted
from the original idea by Engwicht (1993) to promote sociability,
safety and health through an adult-supervised walk to and from
school. Recent assessments are demonstrating that WSBs have the
potential to increase trust and sense of community within schools
and neighbourhoods as children walk with the parents of their
peers (Johnston, 2008). Research has also examined the health
bene<U+FB01>ts, as measured by total levels of physical activity,
associated with children’s active travel, for both trips between
home and school (Boarnet et al., 2005), and neighbourhood-level
journeys more generally (Mackett et al., 2005). In Auckland, it has
been found that children who participate in the WSB are provided
with greater opportunities to be physically active in general, and
heightened encouragement to continue to participate in walking
for exercise and enjoyment (Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006).
Such bene<U+FB01>ts notwithstanding, there is a clear socio-spatial
pattern to uptake of the initiative and this limits the opportunity
for some children and families to participate. Speci<U+FB01>cally, WSBs
tend to be adopted in areas of higher socioeconomic status. At
least in the Auckland case, this has been in part due to the
economic and political priorities of reducing traf<U+FB01>c congestion
having precedence over the public health priorities of reducing
injury to child pedestrians and promoting physical activity

ARTICLE IN PRESS
D. Collins, R.A. Kearns /
(Collins and Kearns, 2005). This view suggests a broader trend:
less af<U+FB02>uent schools may face limitations in the establishment and
maintenance of volunteer-driven initiatives (Kearns et al., 2003).
Yet, it is in low-income neighbourhoods that the case for the WSB
initiative is perhaps most pressing: rates of child pedestrian injury
tend to be high, opportunities for organized recreational activity
are low, and the public health impacts of a sedentary lifestyle
most evident (Collins and Kearns, 2005; Johnston, 2008). An
intervention that facilitates pedestrian reclamation of public
space, and encourages supervised walking and routine physical
activity, has much promise in such environments.
Evaluations of the signi<U+FB01>cance of WSBs have also considered
their durability, and sought to determine the factors that have
contributed to their growth and longevity in some contexts.
Kingham and Ussher (2005) surveyed schools with WSBs in
Christchurch, New Zealand, and found that few routes have
survived longer than one and a half years. However, in the larger
urban setting of Auckland, Kearns and Collins (2006) found that
routes which survived the initial period of vulnerability were
highly likely to continue to operate. Longitudinal work, as
presented in this paper, allows this issue to be addressed in
greater detail.
Certainly the operation of WSBs has not been without
dif<U+FB01>culty: commonly-reported problems have included child
safety, volunteer recruitment, and lack of council and school
involvement with WSBs after initial set-up. Potential responses to
such challenges include increased responsiveness to parental
suggestions (Kingham and Ussher, 2005), and recognition of
regular participation on the part of children and parents alike
through small, but symbolically important, incentives (Kearns and
Collins, 2006). The modest expenditure that such incentives
require (e.g., on the part of supportive transport agencies), may
pay dividends in travel demand management terms by sustaining
an initiative that normalizes walking, and enables children to
develop pedestrian skills and con<U+FB01>dence (Kingham and Ussher,
2007). In addition, international evidence suggests that as rates of
walking (and cycling) increase, the risk of being struck by
motorists declines, likely due to increased awareness and
behavioural modi<U+FB01>cation on the part of drivers (Jacobsen, 2003).
With these potential bene<U+FB01>ts in mind, we turn to the central focus
of our paper: the <U+FB01>ve annual surveys of WSB activity in Auckland.


3. Growth and patterns of operation

Our surveys have been concerned, in part, with establishing
baseline data on variables such as the number of routes in
operation and the number of children participating in the
initiative. Table 1 presents a picture of the ongoing growth of
the WSB initiative in the Auckland region throughout the study
period. Steady increases in numbers of both routes and
participants speak to an enduring popularity, although they also
mask a level of volatility. The category of respondent routes, for
Table 1
Overview of WSB activities (2002–2006).
2002
Total schools with at least one route                          34
Routes responding to survey                                    39
Children registered (respondent routes)                        575
Children walking (typical morning; respondent routes)          n/aa
Adult volunteers registered (respondent routes)                317
a
Not asked.

Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8                                            3
example, is made up of new routes (20% of the total at the time of
the last survey), established routes responding for the <U+FB01>rst time,
and previous respondents – while excluding any routes that have
ceased to function. Similarly, the <U+FB01>gure for children walking – as
with any form of transport patronage – is determined by ‘‘[t]he
relative size of the incomers, outgoers and loyal customers’’
(Goodwin, 2008, p. 29).
Table 1 also illustrates that only slightly more than half of
those children registered for WSBs (and thus eligible to participate
on days of their parents’ choice), actually join the bus on an
average morning. This may be explained in part by the complexity
of family travel schedules, which can change from day-to-day, and
by decreased enthusiasm for walking in winter months. In
addition, while the number of children registered per route has
tended to increase, actual participation levels remain fairly static
on a per route basis. A notable drop-off in ridership occurs on days
affected by rain. For example, in 2006, average ridership declined
by 41.4% on a wet morning (with 25 routes ceasing to operate),
and 28.7% on a wet afternoon (with 5 routes ceasing to operate).
One trend that became apparent relatively early in the analysis
of WSB activities is that take-up of the initiative is not evenly
distributed throughout the region; rather it is concentrated in
schools whose pupils are drawn from wealthier neighbourhoods.
Speci<U+FB01>cally, schools with high Ministry of Education decile-
rankings are most likely to have WSBs. Decile-rankings are
determined by <U+FB01>ve census-based indicators of neighbourhood
socioeconomic status: families on low-incomes; parents in low-
skill occupations; overcrowded households; parents with no
formal quali<U+FB01>cations; and parents who receive welfare payments.
Schools are then ranked according to the proportion of pupils they
draw from low socioeconomic status neighbourhoods. Decile 10
schools are the 10% of institutions that draw the lowest proportion
of students from these communities; decile 1 schools are the 10%
of institutions that have the highest proportion of these students.
Fig. 1 illustrates that although WSBs are present at an increasing
number of schools throughout Auckland between 2002 and 2006,
they have always been most common at high decile schools.
Fig. 1 also reveals an enduring tendency for decile 10 schools to
be the most likely to adopt the WSB initiative. Speci<U+FB01>cally, for
each year in which a survey was conducted, decile 10 schools
accounted for between 41% and 50% of all schools with WSBs.
Expanding this analysis to include other high decile schools (i.e.,
deciles 8 and 9) the concentration has varied between 54% (2003)
and 63% (2005). One consequence of this pattern is that
respondents to the annual WSB surveys have consistently been
drawn from a population that is strongly weighted towards the
top of the socioeconomic spectrum. The unequal distribution of
WSBs may also contribute to an existing tendency in New Zealand
towards more protective parenting cultures in wealthier areas;
there is evidence to suggest that children’s opportunities for
unaccompanied active travel vary inversely with socioeconomic
status (Kypri et al., 2000; Mitchell et al., 2007; Tranter and
Pawson, 2001).


2003            2004          2005       2006         Change 2002–2006 (%)
54                 54           79         83         +144
42                 89          108        158         +305
677             1519          2019       2873         +400
n/aa             821          1099       1655         n/a
n/aa             750           846       1264         +299



ARTICLE IN PRESS
4                                                         D. Collins, R.A. Kearns /
35

30         2002 Schools
2003 Schools
25
2004 Schools

20         2005 Schools
Count   15         2006 Schools

10

5

0
1     2      3      4      5     6     7       8       9     10
School Deciles

Fig. 1. All Auckland primary schools with WSBs by decile 2002–2006.




The degree to which WSBs are a feature of the urban landscape
depends not only on their distribution, but also on their duration
and frequency of operation. The <U+FB01>rst issue is simple to address:
the average walking time of a single WSB journey was reported, in
each of the last three surveys, as being 20 min. The second issue is
somewhat more complex: in broad terms there is a trend towards
WSBs operating for more (indeed, almost all) potential morning
trips, but progressively fewer afternoon journeys. On average, 85%
of routes operating in 2006 walked on any given morning, while
the equivalent afternoon <U+FB01>gure was just 53%. For the <U+FB01>rst time
since this question was asked in 2004, less than half of all routes
were operating for one journey ‘‘option’’: Friday afternoons. In
comparing these operation rates with previous years, we note a
continued increase in morning route activity – from 75% in 2004,
to 82% in 2005 and to 85% in 2006. By contrast, afternoon activity
has entered a pronounced decline: from 68% in 2004, to 63% in
2005 and to 53% in 2006. The most likely reason for the decline in
afternoon route activity is lower demand, associated with the
complicated timetabling brought about by participation in after-
school extra-curricular activities. It is not possible to predict
whether this trend will continue, or whether operation levels will
stabilize.


4. Sustainability

An enduring concern of the annual research into WSBs has
been to re<U+FB02>ect on their sustainability. Speci<U+FB01>cally, we have sought
to identify and measure indicators which point to their endurance
and robustness (on the one hand), and persistent dif<U+FB01>culties or
declines in activity which cast doubt on their durability (on the
other). This concern is motivated largely by recognition that WSBs
are volunteer-driven initiatives, potentially vulnerable to declines
in support after the initial enthusiasm and novelty has subsided.
Moreover, even ‘‘successful’’ WSBs must recruit new volunteers
and participants on a relatively regular basis as families leave the
neighbourhood, parents adopt new schedules, and older children
leave the WSB. Our research, which focuses on aggregate data, has
a limited ability to quantify such ‘‘churn’’ (Goodwin, 2008),
although some survey respondents have noted the challenges
associated with volunteer and passenger turnover. It appears that
the longer a routes endures, the more embedded it becomes in the
routines of families and the tradition of the school community.
Indeed, it is at the scale of the school that commitment to WSBs
may be most important: while individual routes can struggle, and

Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8
occasionally close, it is exceptionally rare in Auckland for a school
served by one or more WSB routes to abandon the initiative
altogether.
In the <U+FB01>rst annual report, we identi<U+FB01>ed three indicators of WSB
sustainability: longevity, growth and support. We proceeded to

note that as 18 of 21 surveyed WSBs had been in operation for
fewer than 12 months, there was limited opportunity to comment
on longevity. However, only three routes had been known to cease
operation during the year, and most others had either static or
increasing numbers of child participants. Levels of parental
support, as measured by factors such as a 1:1.8 ratio of registered
volunteers to child walkers, were high. The following year we
found increased evidence of the normalization of WSBs as both a
form of mobility for children and as a form of volunteer
commitment for parents. For example, at 27 of 53 surveyed
schools, one or more WSB routes had been in operation for over 1
year, and a majority of routes were witnessing increased levels of

child participation.
Subsequent reports found that while ridership levels continued
to be strong, this was not matched by volunteer commitment.
Rather, the numbers of parents volunteering to assist on one of
more scheduled walks per week was static or decreasing in most
cases. Over time, these trends had led to a gradual increase in the
registered volunteer-to-child ratio, from 1:1.8 to 1:2.4. Respon-
dents portrayed static or declining volunteer numbers as proble-
matic, primarily because of the burden placed on those adults
who continued to participate. While this situation is likely to have
motivated some volunteers to withdraw from involvement, it does
not appear to have threatened the overall expansion of WSB
activity (see Table 1). With few routes experiencing signi<U+FB01>cant
declines in passenger numbers (and fewer still ceasing to operate),
there is little reason to question the sustainability of WSBs. At
many schools, they are now well-established institutions.


5. Bene<U+FB01>ts

In Auckland, walking for school journeys has been valued and
promoted by government agencies for reasons relating primarily
to the imperatives of reducing car use and school-gate congestion.
Indeed, it was initial evidence of this effect – a <U+FB01>nding that the
<U+FB01>rst WSB in Auckland saved an average 19.5 car journeys per day
(Kearns, 2001) – that prompted governmental interest. An
ongoing focus on WSBs as a means for facilitating a modal shift
from driving to walking has been re<U+FB02>ected in the annual surveys,
which have sought to estimate not only the number of children
walking, but also the number of car journeys averted.
In 2006, respondents estimated that 63% of children partici-
pating in WSBs would otherwise have been driven. From this
<U+FB01>gure, we calculated the average number of car trips averted per
route each morning (7.6) and afternoon (7.3). Multiplying each of
these averages by 180, and adding the totals, suggests a total of
2667 journeys saved. However, this does not take into account the
fact that many buses only operate on select mornings and
afternoons. On an average morning, 85% of routes operate, and
on an average afternoon, the <U+FB01>gure is 53%. Thus, we can estimate
that 153 routes operate on a typical morning, and 95 on a typical
afternoon. Multiplying these numbers by 7.6 and 7.3, respectively,
produces a total of 1840 journeys saved on an average day in 2006.
The results of this analysis, and those for the previous 2 years, are
presented in Table 2. The data point to a steady increase in
journeys saved, consistent with increasing numbers of respondent
routes.
The estimates of journeys saved assume, for the sake of
simplicity, that if one child who would otherwise have been
driven to school uses the WSB on a given morning (or afternoon),

ARTICLE IN PRESS
D. Collins, R.A. Kearns /
Table 2
Estimated car journeys saved (respondent schools only) (2004–2006).

Journeys saved           2004 (n ¼ 104     2005 (n ¼ 120       2006 (n ¼ 180
routes)           routes)             routes)

Average per route:          7.6               7.2                   7.6
mornings
Average per route:          6.7               6.7                   7.3
afternoons

Total for all routes     1046              1212                1840
(a.m.+p.m.)




one car journey is averted. It does not take into account any
‘‘return’’ (school-to-home) journeys on the part of morning
parent-drivers, or a number of other complicating factors

regarding driving distances and directions. The same principles

apply for calculating afternoon <U+FB01>gures. Nevertheless, the increas-

ing numbers of journeys saved, and a relatively consistent average
of approximately seven car journeys saved each time a route
operates, point to the utility of WSBs in reducing car use. Such
bene<U+FB01>ts may continue after children leave WSBs (typically at age
9–10), as many ‘‘graduate’’ to independent walking, either by
themselves or with friends (Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006). It appears
that regular WSB participants become ‘‘accustomed’’ to walking
for local journeys, particularly those associated with schooling.
Importantly, for those parents who organize and participate in
WSBs, the initiative is not valued solely, or even primarily, for its
contribution to reducing car-dependence or alleviating conges-
tion. In each of the last 3 surveys, respondents were asked to rank
the bene<U+FB01>ts of WSB activity, as they perceived it. While less car
use has always featured among the top four bene<U+FB01>ts, it has never

been the highest-ranked bene<U+FB01>t. Rather, in 2004 and 2005, the
most valued bene<U+FB01>t was health and exercise. In 2006, the

community and social bene<U+FB01>ts of WSBs were to the fore. The

fourth consistently highly-ranked bene<U+FB01>t relates to the perception

that adult supervision reduces the risk of child pedestrian injury.

Alongside the ranking of bene<U+FB01>ts, respondents were also asked

to comment on the positive experiences of WSB involvement.

These help to provide an insider’s view of a volunteer-driven

initiative. First, parents coordinating WSB activities have often

commented enthusiastically about the perceived health bene<U+FB01>ts

of regular walking, with some reporting marked improvements in

children’s (and, sometimes, adults’) <U+FB01>tness levels. Illustrative

responses to questions about bene<U+FB01>ts have included:

Creating healthy lifestyles. Enjoyment of walking. Fitness.

The children let off steam walking to school (which increases

their <U+FB01>tness) [and] they are more settled upon arrival to school.

Walking revs up everyone’s metabolism.


Such viewpoints echo contemporary health promotion lan-

guage, which earlier research into WSBs found may be inter-

nalized by many child participants (Kearns et al., 2003). In

addition, participants were cognizant of other bene<U+FB01>ts which

feature prominently in of<U+FB01>cial discourses around walking to

school, and less car use: reduced congestion, injury prevention,

and the promotion of road safety skills. Yet another important

bene<U+FB01>t in the eyes of many respondents was that of sociability,
and a heightened sense of community.

While the contribution of schools to social cohesion has been

remarked on elsewhere (Witten et al., 2003), the act of routinely
walking to and from school offers an additional opportunity for
social interaction, above and beyond that which may be found
through conversations at the school-gate, or participation in

Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8                                           5
school events. In general terms, walking offers chances for
conversation among strangers and casual acquaintances that are
often rare in a private-automobile oriented society (Bean et al.,

2008). WSBs offer speci<U+FB01>c opportunities for social interaction
between children of different ages, between parents who may not
otherwise know each other, and between children and adults who
are unrelated. Such interactions are valued, as the following


responses to questions about the positive aspects of walking
attest:

Friendship building, children getting to know other adults they
do not usually have contact with, children enjoying walking
with friends, great way for new families to get to know families
in neighbourhood.
[It’s] a focal point in the community [that] gives neighbours a
reason to communicate.

Younger children getting to know older children at school. The

older children are very supportive of the younger ones on the

bus-this carries on at school.

The promotion of road safety is another commonly-reported
positive experience, linked to the idea that children learn valuable
practical knowledge about traf<U+FB01>c through routine, adult-super-
vised walking. Signi<U+FB01>cantly, the perceptions of children being
better equipped in terms of safety extend beyond traf<U+FB01>c-related
risk. For instance, according to one coordinator, ‘‘children are
aware of safe people/houses in the community’’. In other words,
although road safety may be prominent in parents’ minds,
knowledge of the community generated through routine walking
under adult supervision may also yield safety bene<U+FB01>ts.



6. Discipline


References to learning rules for road safety point to the

disciplined nature of participation in a walking school bus. The

form of walking it offers is highly structured, in terms of

timetable, route and expectations as to behaviour. While walking

for transportation (as opposed to leisure) can be interpreted as

counter-cultural, especially in auto-dominated environments such

as Auckland, the speci<U+FB01>c form of walking required by a WSB also

reinforces particular cultural notions of childhood. In particular,

children are perceived as unpredictable pedestrians, poorly

equipped for a world dominated by cars, and in need of constant

adult surveillance and correction.

In this context, impulsive and/or playful behaviour on the part
of children presents a challenge for adult volunteers. Indeed, WSB
survey responses are replete with complaints about children’s ill-

discipline and unreliability. Typically, the behaviours complained

about are relatively common to groups of primary school-aged

children, and include pushing, <U+FB01>ghting and general unruliness, as
well as not being fully attentive. Responses include re-assertions

of rules, the invoking of school and parental authority, and – in

some cases – exclusion from the group.

The re<U+FB02>ections of adult coordinators on the challenges of

walking with groups of children also invoked particular under-

standings of gender. With some frequency, they indicated that

misbehaviour was most often associated with boys, who lacked

common sense, and pushed boundaries:


Too many small/young boys makes it a dif<U+FB01>cult to control

group.

Keeping the boys walking rather than running/racing.
The only negative has been a situation where we had 12
walkers, 10 of them small boys and they were a bit boisterous.

ARTICLE IN PRES
6                                                  D. Collins, R.A. Kearns
Accordingly, reported responses to behavioural challenges also
had a gendered dimension:

Talk to the boys. Reprimand them. Give them to the Principal to
deal with it by informing their parents.
Children have been put into two lines. A line for girls and a line
for boys to prevent bad behaviour.

Across our 5 years of reports, girls are very seldom mentioned,
and never in a negative context, suggesting that they are
perceived as relatively quiet and compliant walkers.
Expectations of compliant walking are not limited to child
‘‘subjects’’, and complaints about the unreliability and unruliness of
adults are also common. These often focus on failures on the part of
parents to inform volunteers that their child will not be walking on a
particular day (resulting in unnecessary delays and anxiety), as well
as volunteers ‘‘not turning up for their rostered shift.’’ The voluntary
basis of WSB participation means this unreliability does not result in
formal reprimand. A related negative experience concerns the
recruitment and retention of volunteers, with a proportion of
parents considerably more keen for their child to walk with the
group, than they are to volunteer their own time to assist with the
operation (i.e., the freeloader problem).


7. Gender

The overwhelming majority of those who do volunteer in WSB
initiatives are mothers. Our most recent survey (the <U+FB01>rst to
explicitly address gender) found that 88% of volunteers are
women, and that a majority of routes (54%) have no male
volunteers. In addition, 21% of routes have just one male
volunteer, and no WSB has more men than women. When asked

to comment on the dif<U+FB01>culties associated with recruiting male

volunteers, 75% of WSB coordinators (themselves usually

mothers) noted that men’s work routines precluded volunteering.
Comments such as ‘‘they work!’’, ‘‘work commitments’’ and ‘‘most
work full-time and are therefore unable to help’’ were almost
ubiquitous. Only a small minority (6%) suggested that stereotypes
about gender roles were independently responsible for the lack of
male involvement: generally, the notion that ‘‘most males are in
full-time employment whilst mums are the main caregivers’’ was
stated as a simple fact of Auckland life.
This said, recruiting female volunteers was seldom without
challenge: only 20% of respondents reported no problems in this
area (7% also reported no problems in recruiting men). For 32% of
respondents, dif<U+FB01>culties in securing female volunteers was also
attributed to ‘‘work’’, while 27% noted that the responsibilities of
caring for other family members (especially younger children of
pre-school age) made it dif<U+FB01>cult for many women to be involved.
While child-care responsibilities were never mentioned as factors
restricting men’s participation in walking, they were considered

common for women, either independently or in combination with

paid work:

[Some] mothersy work full-time; but the ‘‘at home’’ mums
have other commitments with other kids, i.e., babies and
toddlers, or older kids needing to be taken to another school.

[Our] route [can’t] be managed with younger siblings walking
or in push-chairs [i.e., strollers]. [It] has a steep hill at the
beginning. [Also,] mothers of older children are returning to
work.

Work commitments, pregnancy, reluctance to commit if they
have small babies.
S
/ Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8
One consequence of reliance on mothers’ volunteer labour is
that routes are vulnerable to declines in support if and when
women return to full-time work outside the home. Certainly, the
data con<U+FB01>rm that the temporal and spatial demands of work in
Auckland (where long commutes, typically in sole-occupant
motor vehicles, are routine) are often inconsistent with super-
vising children walking to and from school. As has been noted
elsewhere (Beckmann, 2001; Sheller and Urry, 2000), automobi-
lity is associated with the intense scheduling of everyday life,
including long working hours, and with the need to be highly
<U+FB02>exible. For many parents, one consequence of this is unavail-
ability for walking to and from school. Accordingly, if they want
their children to be supervised on these journeys, they are reliant
on the volunteer labour of other adults, or dependent on
alternatives such as driving children as part of their own travel
to and from work (i.e., trip-chaining).


8. Walkers’ observations of the urban environment

Routine walking leads volunteers to re<U+FB02>ect critically on the
hazards pedestrians must negotiate. Such re<U+FB02>ection is evident in a
variety of comments, including those focussed on driver beha-
viour, the built environment and the marginal status of walking/
walkers in Auckland. In combination, these comments amount to
a critique of auto-dominance:
[Our problem is] cars. We are just not getting through to
parents, the council, or the police. People are not stopping.
There is no pedestrian crossing. [The] road is extremely busy
with a 70 km/h speed limit. We eventually got council to install
an island but we have 30 kids some days and 2 adults. It is hard
to get 30 kids safely onto a small traf<U+FB01>c island.

It is along a very busy main arterial route with lots of side

street crossings. Despite council’s assurances that a crossing

aide would be installedy nothing has been done.

Traf<U+FB01>c management issues feature prominently in accounts of
negative experiences. Common concerns include ‘‘drivers accel-
erating too fast on to driveways,’’ ‘‘impatient motorists when we
are crossing side roads,’’ and cars ‘‘running red lights’’ as well as
speeding through pedestrian crossings. In addition, many co-
ordinators have identi<U+FB01>ed intersections which do not allow for
safe crossing, especially by a group of children:

One of the roads we cross is quite dangerous. It’s very hard to
see in both directions and cross safely particularly on the
occasions when we have only one [volunteer].
The pedestrian crossing is very dangerous. We have all seen
cars go through red lights there. Could we get speed cameras
installed to help slow traf<U+FB01>c? The crossing is at the bottom of a
hill and cars tend to pick up speed as they go down.

Such comments speak to the hazards associated with auto-

mobilization that have contributed to children’s retreat from the

street, and which individual pedestrians have a very limited
ability to address. This said, over time WSBs – in combination
with other initiatives intended to normalize active travel in
Auckland – may promote more cautious driver behaviour,
consistent with Jacobsen’s (2003) <U+FB01>ndings around ‘‘safety in
numbers’’ for pedestrians and cyclists. In addition, the organized
and institutionalized nature of WSBs has already been used as
leverage to achieve improvements in the local environment:
councils have often been willing to undertake relatively inexpen-
sive actions, such as cutting back overhanging vegetation, and
upgrading/maintaining footpaths, in response to requests from
coordinators.

ARTICLE IN PRESS
D. Collins, R.A. Kearns /
9. Conclusion

In the Auckland region, routine walking to and from school is
encouraged by increasing numbers of WSB routes. These are
frequently portrayed as an affordable contribution to addressing
urban ills ranging from traf<U+FB01>c congestion to childhood obesity.
Their ability to reduce car journeys is, perhaps inevitably, a
particular focus of attention. However, recent health promotion
initiatives centred on the importance of routine physical activity

have helped cast a different light on the importance of attempts to
re-legitimate walking, especially for neighbourhood-level jour-
neys.

In broad terms, the act of supervised walking challenges some

of the social practices associated with automobile dependency.
For example, many survey respondents have insisted that children

have a legitimate place on the footpaths of the city, and that they

are entitled to walk to and from school (albeit in a regulated
manner). Obstacles to the realization of this entitlement – ranging
from dangerous driving, to intersections that cannot be safely

navigated, to deteriorating pedestrian infrastructure – are por-
trayed as unacceptable. In this way coordinators’ arguments
contest ingrained notions that children must ‘‘give way’’ to cars.

In some ways, then, WSBs are contributing – albeit modestly – to
a social movement revaluing New Zealand cities as walkable
places.

The involvement of relatively large numbers of adults in
walking with groups of children also suggests a (re)emerging
understanding of supervised walking as an appropriate means of

caring for children. While, in some circumstances, car use may be

a measure of parental (especially maternal) contribution to
children’s wellbeing (Dowling, 2000), many parents in Auckland

have come to see the supervision of children’s walking in a similar

light. Their generally positive views of walking are underpinned
by a range of perceived bene<U+FB01>ts, including health and <U+FB01>tness, and
the sociability and sense of community that is fostered by regular

conversations among relatively diverse groups of children and
adults. A key challenge for future research will be to assess
whether such positive assessments of walking – also perceived by

children (Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006) – result in a long-term
transition to independent active travel, and reduced automobile
dependence, on the part of former participants.

Ultimately, however, the phenomenon of a supervised walk to
and from school is not revolutionary. Many parents, including the
majority of fathers, are apparently unable to volunteer to walk

with children due to demands of full-time work. Typically, they

are commuting at the time that children depart to school –
traversing the physical separation between home and work that
has been greatly expanded by the rise of the automobile. In

addition, understandings of adult supervision and control,
inherent in the WSB concept, are emblematic of enduring
concerns about the (in)ability of children to negotiate automo-

bile-dominated space independently.
In light of such issues, the continued promotion of WSBs in
Auckland should proceed with recognition that supervised

walking is neither the sole answer to children’s mobility needs,
nor a panacea for the ills of auto-dominated environments
(Engwicht, 2003). Rather, WSBs can and perhaps should be

regarded as stepping stones towards two broader developments:
increased independent mobility for children for a range of
neighbourhood-level journeys; and signi<U+FB01>cantly reduced car use,

speeds and density in suburban neighbourhoods. If these twin

goals were achieved, formalized WSBs might not be needed.
Moreover, for as long as supervised walking is required, it may
continue to reinforce some of the social identities associated with

automobile-dominated space (i.e., those around gender roles, and
the public incompetence of children). This said, it is clear that

Transport Policy 17 (2010) 1–8                                                                7
routine walking in groups also helps to break down the social
isolation often associated with automobilized family lifestyles,
and alerts adult participants, in particular, to the some of the costs
and dangers associated with allowing motor vehicles to dominate
the public spaces of everyday life.

References

Auckland Regional Transport Authority (ARTA), 2008. Active Transport: Walking.
Available from: /http://www.arta.co.nz/S (accessed 27.04.08).
Barker, J., 2003. Passengers or political actors? Children’s participation in transport
policy and the micro political geographies of the family. Space and Polity 7 (2),
135–151.
Bean, C., Kearns, R.A., Collins, D.C.A., 2008. Exploring social mobilities: narratives of

walking and driving in Auckland, New Zealand. Urban Studies 45 (13),
2829–2848.
Beckmann, J., 2001. Automobility – a social problem and theoretical
concept. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 19 (5),

593–607.
Boarnet, M.G., Anderson, C.L., Day, K., McMillan, T., Alfonzo, M., 2005. Evaluation of
the California safe routes to school legislation: urban form changes and
children’s active transportation to school. American Journal of Preventative
Medicine 28 (2), 134–140.
Collins, D.C.A., Kearns, R.A., 2001. The safe journeys of an enterprising school:
negotiating landscapes of opportunity and risk. Health and Place 7,
293–306.
Collins, D., Kearns, R., 2005. Geographies of inequality: child pedestrian injury and
walking school buses in Auckland, New Zealand. Social Science and Medicine
60, 61–69.
Dowling, R., 2000. Cultures of mothering and car use in suburban Sydney: a
preliminary investigation. Geoforum 31, 345–353.
Engwicht, D., 1993. Reclaiming Our Cities and Towns: Better Living with Less
Traf<U+FB01>c. New Society Publishing, Philadelphia.
Engwicht, D., 2003. Is the WSB stalled in an evolutionary cul-de-sac? Available
from: /http://www.lesstraf<U+FB01>c.com/Articles/Traf<U+FB01>c/wbstalled.htmS (accessed

20.04.2008).
Goodwin, P., 2008. Policy incentives to change behaviour in passenger transport.
OECD International Transport Forum, Leipzig, May 2008. Centre for Transport
and Society, University of the West of England, Bristol.

Jacobsen, P.L., 2003. Safety in numbers: more walkers and bicyclists, safer walking
and cycling. Injury Prevention 9, 205–209.
Johnston, B.D., 2008. Planning for child pedestrians: issues of health, safety and
social justice. Journal of Urban Design 13 (1), 141–145.
Kearns, R., 2001. Walking the talk about child pedestrian safety: an evaluation of
Gladstone School’s Zippy Walking Bus. Report to Auckland Regional Council,
Department of Geography, University of Auckland.
Kearns, R., Collins, D., 2003. Crossing roads, crossing boundaries: autonomy,
authority and risk in a child pedestrian safety initiative. Space and Polity 7 (2),
193–212.
Kearns, R., Collins, D., 2006. Children in the intensifying city – lessons
from Auckland’s walking school buses. In: Gleeson, B., Sipe, N. (Eds.),
Creating Child-Friendly Cities: Reinstating Kids in the City. Routledge, London,
pp. 105–120.
Kearns, R., Collins, D., Neuwelt, P., 2003. The walking school bus: extending
children’s geographies?. Area 35 (3), 285–292.
Kingham, S., Ussher, S., 2005. Ticket to a sustainable future: an evaluation of the

long-term durability of the walking school bus programme in Christchurch,
New Zealand. Transport Policy 12 (4), 314–323.
Kingham, S., Ussher, S., 2007. An assessment of the bene<U+FB01>ts of the walking
school bus in Christchurch, New Zealand. Transportation Research Part A 41,
502–510.
Kypri, K., Chalmers, D.J., Langley, J.D., Wright, C.S., 2000. Child injury mortality in
New Zealand. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health 36, 431–439.
Lang, D., 2007. To drive or to walk? An examination of school travel behaviour at a
North Shore City primary school. Master of Science Thesis in Environmental
Management, The University of Auckland.
Mackett, R.L., Lucas, L., Paskins, J., Turbin, J., 2003. A methodology for evaluating
walking buses as an instrument of urban transport policy. Transport Policy 10,
179–186.
Mackett, R.L., Lucas, L., Paskins, J., Turbin, J., 2005. The therapeutic
value of children’s everyday travel. Transportation Research Part A 39,
205–219.
McMillan, T.E., 2007. The relative in<U+FB02>uence of urban form on a child’s travel mode
to school. Transportation Research Part A 41, 69–79.
Mitchell, H., Kearns, R., Collins, D., 2007. Nuances of neighbourhood: children’s
perceptions of the space between home and school in Auckland, New Zealand.
Geoforum 38, 614–627.

Monbiot, G., 2007. Car-Nage. Published May 15. Available from: /http://www.
monbiot.com/archives/2007/05/15/car-nage/S (accessed 18.05.2007).
Neuwelt, P., Kearns, R., 2006. Health bene<U+FB01>ts of walking school buses in Auckland,
New Zealand: perceptions of children and adults. Children, Youth and
Environments 16 (1), 104–120.
Pooley, C., Turnbull, J., Adams, M., 2005. The journey to school in Britain since the
1940s: continuity and change. Area 37 (1), 43–53.
