

Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18



Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Transport Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tranpol




Children's travel to school—the interaction of individual, neighbour-
hood and school factors
Sue Easton n, Ed Ferrari
Department of Town and Regional Planning, University of Shef<U+FB01>eld, Western Bank, Shef<U+FB01>eld S10 2TN, UK




art ic l e i nf o                                       a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                        The increase in average distance from home to secondary school over recent decades has been accom-
Received 22 October 2014                                panied by a signi<U+FB01>cant growth in the proportion of pupils travelling to school by motorized means as
Received in revised form                                opposed to walking or cycling. More recently this switch in travel mode has received considerable at-
6 May 2015
tention as declining levels of physical activity, growing car dependence and the childhood obesity “crisis”
Accepted 30 May 2015
Available online 10 July 2015
have pushed concerns about the health of future generations up the public health agenda, particularly in
the U.S., but also in the UK and Europe. This has led to a proliferation of international studies researching
Keywords:                                               a variety of individual, school and spatial characteristics associated with children's active travel to school
Travel to school                                        which has been targeted by some governments as a potential silver bullet to reverse the trend. However,
Active transport
to date national pupil census data, which comprises annual data on all English pupils, including a mode of
Mode of travel
travel to school variable, has been under-utilised in the analysis of how pupils commute to school. Fur-
Multilevel model
Sociospatial                                            thermore, methodologically, the grouped nature of the data with pupils clustered within both schools
Secondary                                               and residential neighbourhoods has often been ignored - an omission which can have considerable
Pupils                                                  consequences for the statistical estimation of the model. The research presented here seeks to address
Motorised transport                                     both of these points by analysing pupil census data on all 26,709 secondary pupils (aged 11–16) who
attended schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld, UK during the 2009–10 school year. Individual pupil data is grouped within
school, and neighbourhood, within a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model of active versus motorised modes
of commuting to school. The results support the <U+FB01>ndings of other research that distance to school is key,
but suggest that sociospatial clustering within neighbourhoods and schools is also critical. A further
<U+FB01>nding is that distance to school varies signi<U+FB01>cantly by ethnicity, with white British pupils travelling the
shortest distance of all ethnic groups. The implications of these <U+FB01>ndings for education and transport
policy are discussed.
& 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




1. Introduction                                                                         1975), which involves both longer travel distances and an urban
form that favours car use (Dieleman et al., 2002, Newman and
In the mid-1980s the mean distance travelled to school by 11–                       Kenworthy, 2006). A third factor that has also in<U+FB02>uenced the
16 year olds in the UK was just over 2 miles; by 2013 this had                          length of children's journey to school is legislation promoting
almost doubled, increasing to 3.7 miles (Department for Transport,                      parental choice, which has encouraged the selection of out-of-area
2013). This lengthening of the high school commute has been in-                         schools (see for example Parsons et al., 2000, Hoare, 1975). In re-
<U+FB02>uenced by some of the urban-structural processes which have                            cent studies it has been estimated that less than half of all school-
occurred over the past 50 years. Firstly a marked increase in the                       age children in England now attend their nearest school (Allen,
size of high schools, which began in the post-war decades (Rigby,                       2007, Ferrari and Green, 2013).
1979) has resulted in secondary schools drawing their pupil in-                            These changes in the spatial con<U+FB01>guration of schools and urban
takes from wider catchment areas on average. Second, the sub-                           space have been accompanied by signi<U+FB01>cant social change such as
urbanisation and decentralisation which has occurred in many                            the rise of the dual-working family and growing private car
cities has dispersed some school-aged children to family housing                        ownership, a corollary of increased household af<U+FB02>uence. These
in low density new-build housing estates on the outskirts (Hoare,                       have occurred over a period that has seen the cost of car travel
decrease in real terms compared to other forms of transport
n
Corresponding author.                                                             (especially following deregulation and privatisation of public
E-mail address: s.easton@shef<U+FB01>eld.ac.uk (S. Easton).                              transport which occurred in the 1980s (Fairhurst and Edwards,

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2015.05.023
0967-070X/& 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).














































































10                                               S. Easton, E. Ferrari


1996)). The rise in volume of road traf<U+FB01>c associated with increased
private car use has also led to rising concerns about road safety,
which has in turn contributed to decreasing child independence
and increased parental surveillance. Parental strategies to cope
with this dual challenge often most conveniently involve driving
children to school en route to work.
All of these factors have combined to produce a highly complex
pattern of travel from home to school characterised by, and en-
abled by, growth in the use of motorised forms of transport. Ac-
cording to 1975/6 National Transport Survey data for Great Britain,
55% of all secondary school pupils walked to school, and 7% tra-
velled by car (Rigby, 1979). By 2012 only 38% of pupils aged 11–16
years walked to school and 26% travelled by car (Department for
Transport, 2013). In 1975–6, walking was the selected mode of
travel for 93.6% of all “education” trips under 1.6 km (approxi-
mately 1 mile), exemplifying the key underlying constraint on
modal choice: distance.
Notwithstanding the effect of distance, the choices that chil-
dren (and their parents) make with regards to school commuting
may depend crucially on the interaction of several factors oper-
ating at a number of levels. Neighbourhood-level factors, which
include characteristics of the urban form and structure, may have a
range of direct and indirect effects on travel behaviour. School-
level factors, most notably variations in the ‘performance’ of
schools and the socioeconomic composition of their pupil intake,
may in<U+FB02>uence school and residential location choices, thereby
potentially circumscribing travel options and average travel dis-
tances to school. Individual-level characteristics, such as age, have
a relationship to the extent to which children will countenance or
be empowered to choose active forms of travel. The relationship
between factors at these different levels is likely to be very com-
plex: individual pupils are simultaneously ‘members’ of their
neighbourhood and the school they attend, and models of travel
behaviour may be underpinned by both <U+FB01>xed (e.g., age, gender)
and random effects (e.g., distance to school).
The aim of this paper is to speci<U+FB01>cally consider the interaction
of these effects in explaining the travel mode of choice for sec-
ondary school children in Shef<U+FB01>eld, UK. A typical UK city char-
acterised by a high degree of self-containment, signi<U+FB01>cant social
variation between schools and neighbourhoods, and a highly
heterogeneous set of pupils within the context of a ‘loosened’,
non-hierarchical spatial relationship between home and school
locations. The <U+FB01>ndings are important for policy makers aiming to
maximise the use of active forms of transport (e.g. for public
health reasons) or to minimise car use (e.g. for environmental or
congestion reasons) and suggest that policy ef<U+FB01>cacy is likely to be
highly contingent on contextual factors, not only of individuals but
of the schools they attend and the neighbourhoods they live in.

1.1. Structure of the paper

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 highlights some of
the shortcomings of the literature in this area to date. Data and
Methods, are described in Section 3, and the Results of the mul-
tilevel models are presented and discussed in Section 4. The
concluding remarks and policy implications are outlined in Section
5.


2. Active commuting: de<U+FB01>nition and correlates

The majority of the literature on commuting to school focuses
on walking and cycling, which are generally referred to as “active”
modes of transport. This term is often used in an oppositional,
dichotomous sense which either explicitly states (see for example
Lee et al., 2008), or implies that modes of transport such as
/ Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18


travelling by car, bus, or train are totally “passive” or “non-active”
(see for example Sirard and Slater, 2008, Voss and Sandercock,
2010). However, this is not necessarily the case, particularly with
regards to public transport where users walk to and from bus or
tram stops or train stations (Rissel et al., 2012). Yet, whilst it is
acknowledged that the degree of activity involved in different
modes of transport can be conceptualised as a continuum, which
itself has signi<U+FB01>cant policy implications, data considerations in the
present study mean that we generally classify journeys into those
that are predominantly “active” or “motorised”.
There is now a burgeoning international literature on active
commuting to school, particularly from the US, in the wake of a
childhood obesity ‘epidemic’, which has shone a spotlight on
school commuting as a potential ameliorative agent that could
provide children with a regular daily dose of physical exercise
(Banerjee et al., 2014). Although there are considerable differences
between the case of the US and Europe in terms of local geo-
graphy, school-siting, the level of car dependency and the pro-
portions of children walking and cycling to school, the dramatic
decrease in active commuting witnessed across North America in
recent decades is one possible future scenario in the UK.
A wide range of factors have been found to be associated with
active school commuting. Stewart’s (2011) review of 42 studies
found 480 correlates including: distance to school, family income
(access to private transport), concern about traf<U+FB01>c and crime en
route, parental views on walking, cycle use and family timetables.
Urban form has both a direct effect on mode of travel choice and,
by in<U+FB02>uencing parental opinion, an indirect effect. The urban form
factors Stewart (2011) identi<U+FB01>ed from other studies include:

 Active transport infrastructure-pavements, safe crossings, cycle
paths;
 Barriers such as major road or railway crossings encountered en
route;
 Network connectivity-local streets, route choice, cul-de-sacs;
 Land use mix-residential (populated) versus industrial, parks,
derelict land;
 Residential density – increased numbers of people, “eyes on the
street”;
 “Walkability”-aesthetic environment (greenery, trees, etc).

The evidence of the impact of urban form is broadly mixed and
is likely to be highly context speci<U+FB01>c. Kemperman and Timmer-
mans (2014) found that Dutch primary school children were more
likely to walk (though not necessarily cycle) in more urbanised
neighbourhoods, although the relationship between factors is
complex and the impact of environmental characteristics may be
indirect (in that distance, for example, is a function of density).
Schlossberg et al. (2006) found that the density of road junctions
and cul-de-sacs in a neighbourhood, as proxies of ‘walkability’,
were signi<U+FB01>cant predictors of walking rates among middle school
pupils in Oregon. Urban form explanations can only be partial,
however. Stead (2001) found that individual and household-level
socioeconomic factors were more important than urban form in
explaining travel patterns, although no attempt was made to
predict travel mode.
The literature is further complicated by the impact of age on
the results. It is widely understood that age is a signi<U+FB01>cant cor-
relate of active commuting (see for example Aarts et al., 2013,
Johansson et al., 2012). However, previous studies comprise a wide
range of subject age-groups, which preclude systematic compar-
ison. There has tended to be a focus on younger children, who
often have less independence (Mammen et al., 2012) and who live
closer to school on average. English primary school children aged
5-10 live 1.6 miles from school on average, compared to 3.7 miles
for 11–16 year olds (Department for Transport, 2013). In order to

S. Easton, E. Ferrari /


minimise the potential effect of parental supervision and varia-
tions in the extent children may be allowed autonomy, this study
focuses on high school children aged 11–16.
Much of the literature focuses either on individual-level pre-
dictors of commuting behaviour or on the effect of physical
neighbourhood characteristics (urban form). Given that both
strands of research appear to claim at least partial success in ex-
plaining mode suggests that there are important interaction or
multilevel effects that arise from pupils’ multiple membership of
non-hierarchical groups (e.g. households, schools and neighbour-
hoods simultaneously). Although multilevel methods have been
employed to investigate children’s mode of travel to school in the
Netherlands (Aarts et al., 2013; Bere et al., 2008), Australia (Trapp
et al., 2012) and Belgium (D’haese et al., 2011), to the best of the
authors’ knowledge this is the <U+FB01>rst piece of research to use this
technique in the UK. This is important because there is a need for
country-speci<U+FB01>c studies given substantial differences in education
policy, urban policy, and levels and forms of urbanisation (Kem-
perman and Timmermans, 2014, Sirard and Slater, 2008).
Aarts et al. (2013) found that low SES neighbourhoods were
negatively correlated with active commuting but that high social
cohesion and perceived social safety (among other factors) were
positively associated with walking and cycling. D’haese et al.,
(2011) used multilevel modelling to allow for clustering within
schools, but (probably due to small sample size) no school-level
factors were entered into the model. Despite the inclusion of
neighbourhood environmental factors such as aesthetic quality in
the model, no clustering by neighbourhood was undertaken. Trapp
et al. (2012) also adjusted for clustering within schools but not for
pupils living in different residential neighbourhoods (which vary
‘substantially’ by socioeconomic status p.173). The issue of cross-
classi<U+FB01>cation where pupils from different neighbourhoods attend
the same school is not addressed. Although neighbourhood
walkability factors such as street connectivity and traf<U+FB01>c volume
are in the model, they are attached to the school rather than area
of residence. Bere et al. (2008) also took clustering between
schools but not neighbourhoods into account, despite <U+FB01>nding

signi<U+FB01>cant differences in school commuting patterns by ethnicity.

Therefore although the above studies have used components of

multilevel models they have not taken into account patterns of

autocorrelation through sociospatial segregation of residential

areas into account.



3. Data and methods


The research design conceptualises pupils as having (multiple)

membership of both schools and neighbourhoods thus they are

grouped within both. The relationship between schools and

neighbourhoods however, is complex, with pupils from one

neighbourhood attending many schools, and pupils within a single

school potentially hailing from many different neighbourhoods.

Pupils also possess personal socioeconomic characteristics (age,

gender, and ethnicity). A cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model is con-

structed to estimate the factors that best explain the variance in

pupils’ ‘active’ and ‘motorised’ commuting to school using a binary

logistic function.

Analysis was performed on all pupils aged 11–16 attending a

state-funded secondary school (including academies) in 2009-10

in Shef<U+FB01>eld, England, a relatively self-contained city dominated by

state school provision1. In our dataset, the neighbourhood-level


1
In 2009–10, 3.8% of children in Shef<U+FB01>eld attended an independent school,
compared to an England average of 7.2% (Department for Education, 2010). Schools,

Pupils and their Characteristics. London., table 10a; 6.3% of schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld

were independent, compared to an England average of 9.7% (ibid., table 10b).
Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18                                                11


proportion of pupils who attend their nearest school2 was on
average 48.8% (median ¼ 48.3%), but varied considerably
(min¼0.0%, max¼ 95.2%, s ¼27.3%). It is clear that children at-
tending schools that are not their nearest is very widespread, va-
lidating the selection of a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed model in which pupils
are members simultaneously of schools and neighbourhoods.
A linked database comprising tables on pupil, schools and
neighbourhoods was created. Anonymised data on pupils was
supplied by Shef<U+FB01>eld City Council within a strict data-sharing
agreement. Pupil variables included: school attended at the time
of the relevant pupil census3, age, gender, ethnicity, eligibility for
free school meals (FSM), a special educational need (SEN) <U+FB02>ag for
SEN-statemented or “School Action Plus” (as these two categories
may affect the choice of school), together with the geographical
coordinates of pupils’ residential location and attended school.
Importantly, the data included a variable recorded at a single time-
point on pupils’ mode of travel to school. This variable was man-
dated in pupil census data by the Department for Education from
2008–9 to 2010–11. The principle advantage of the variable is its
sub-population coverage which comprises the vast majority of
pupils. Its disadvantages lie in having been recorded at a single
point in time with little by way of contextual information. Most
signi<U+FB01>cantly, the variable does not represent the variability of
home-school travel by direction of travel, potential variation
through the week, or seasonal change. Although one US study of
pupils aged 9–15 found that, for those children who lived less than
a mile from school, the majority of pupils who commuted to
school by active means one day a week did so for all <U+FB01>ve days
(Martin et al., 2007), this cannot be veri<U+FB01>ed in the present case.
The data were reality-checked by local authority of<U+FB01>cers who ex-
pressed concern that cycling is probably under-represented be-
cause the survey is undertaken in winter when daylight is minimal
and weather conditions can be severe. Consequently, we do not
disaggregate walking and cycling in our results. It should also be
noted that data collected in a classroom situation may be affected
by peer-group dynamics or 'social desirability’ bias (Millward et al.,

2013). Several research designs, such as those incorporating the

use of GPS tracking or travel diaries (DfT, 2013) can overcome

these limitations, but at the cost of sacri<U+FB01>cing the scale of data

collection. The use of survey data, such as the British Household

Panel Study/Understanding Society allows more socioeconomic

context but the sample size would not be large enough to analyse
local neighbourhoods and the role of school-speci<U+FB01>c or urban form
factors. Consequently, it was concluded that despite several sig-

ni<U+FB01>cant shortcomings the value offered by capturing usual mode
of travel at the individual level offered signi<U+FB01>cant analytical

advantages.

The pupil table comprised 26,709 pupils linked to 100 different

‘neighbourhoods’ and attending one of 27 different state second-

ary schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld. Following the exclusion of missing and

unclassi<U+FB01>able data, 25,798 cases remained (representing a loss of

3.4% of the data). Even taking into account this data loss, the high

level of study population coverage avoids problems such as sample

bias endemic in many national sample surveys (see for example

Mcdonald, 2008). Furthermore the size of the study population

and inclusion of all pupils resident within an entire local authority

district enabled a multilevel analysis of all neighbourhoods and in

this case, secondary schools across the city.

Data on the 27 schools came from the city council and the

Department for Education’s EduBase2 web portal. Variables in-

cluded: the proportion of pupils in the school eligible for free
school meals (the FSM rate); the proportion of pupils recorded as



2
As measured by walking network distance, not crow-<U+FB02>y distance.
3
Late January 2010.

12                                                       S. Easton, E. Ferrari /


having any special educational need (SEN rate); the proportion of
pupils from black and minority ethnic backgrounds (BME rate);
the proportion of pupils for whom English was an additional

language (EAL rate); mean school Key Stage 4 results (proportion
of eligible pupils achieving <U+FB01>ve GCSEs at grades A*-C, including
English and Maths); and the faith status of the school (Christian/

secular).

Neighbourhood characteristics were drawn from the 2011
Census and other small area data. In order to avoid small cell sizes
within the multilevel model (see below), census output areas
(OAs)4 were aggregated into 100 neighbourhoods previously de-
lineated by Shef<U+FB01>eld City Council for policy analysis (Thomas et al.,
2009). A bespoke weighted house-price index was also created

using Land Registry’s data on property sales (sales were pooled for

the period 2007–2011 and seasonally adjusted to overcome small
cell counts).
For each pupil, their route to school for both active and mo-
torised modes was modelled using ArcGIS Network Analyst 10.1.

Route distances from home to school were calculated using the
Ordnance Survey Integrated Transport Network (ITN) for Shef<U+FB01>eld,

including the new Urban Paths layer on the basis of shortest route.

These layers were downloaded from Digimap (Edina, 2014). As-
sumptions were made about overall walking speeds (2.5mph) and
driving speeds on different types of roads at peak commuting
times to determine the route. The calculation of walk-speci<U+FB01>c

distances (using urban paths as well as roads) is an important
innovation that overcomes signi<U+FB01>cant limitations of previous re-
search by allowing model variables to more closely replicate actual
walking behaviour among pupils.
Several urban form variables which previous research had
identi<U+FB01>ed as being related to commuting mode of choice
(Schlossberg et al., 2006) were also created for Shef<U+FB01>eld local
authority district. These included: residential density (calculated
from Of<U+FB01>ce for National Statistics postcode directory data), build-
ing density (from Ordnance Survey MasterMap), cul-de-sac den-
sity, road junction density and network junction density (including
junctions with urban paths)-all of which were calculated from
Ordnance Survey Integrated Transport Network layers using
techniques described in (Reference Suppressed for Review).
Table 1 shows the frequency of the usual mode of travel vari-
able for Shef<U+FB01>eld pupils aged 11–16. This variable was recoded into
a dichotomous variable representing “active” (walking or cycling)
versus “motorised” (bus, car, taxi, tram, train) modes of commut-

ing to school for the purposes of analysis. Local advice from
council of<U+FB01>cers working with schools indicated that the method of

administration for this question had varied across schools and

time, resulting in inconsistencies in the quality of data recorded

over the 3 year period it was collected. It was suggested that the

optimal year for data quality and robustness was 2009–105.

Therefore this was the year selected for cross-sectional analysis.

Several groups of cases were removed from the analysis. 643

cases in the ‘other’ category, which might refer to active or mo-

torised modes, were removed from the analysis. These cases pri-

marily related to pupils from three schools, suggesting that there

were localised problems in the administration of this question. To

avoid potential bias these cases were excluded. A further 265 cases

in the ‘walk’ category were found to involve estimated distances

greater than 3 miles, and therefore potentially indicative of an

inaccurate home address. These cases were also removed from the

analysis. The three mile cut-off was used as it would take ap-
proximately one hour at a sustained walking pace in an urban

4
Of which there were 1817 in Shef<U+FB01>eld in 2011.
5
Personal communication with council of<U+FB01>cers working directly with schools
collecting the data.
Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18


Table 1
Categories for the “usual mode of travel” variable 2009–10.

‘Usual’ mode of               N       % Notes
travel

‘Active’ modes            13,352   50.0
Walk                      13,310   49.8 Excludes 265 cases (see below) whose

distance from home to school was 43
miles
Cycle                        42     0.2

‘Motorised’ modes  12,446          46.6
Bus–Public service  5392           20.2
Bus–School service  2386            8.9
Bus–Unknown type     1030           3.9 Likely to be a mixture of public, school

bus and minibus for pupils with SEN.
Car                        2644     9.9
Carshare                    441      1.7
Taxi                         93     0.3
Tram                        454      1.7
Train                         6    o 0.1


Excluded from               911      3.4

analysis
Other-not known             643    2.4 Potentially mixed active/motorised
modes but primarily from 3 schools—
unclassi<U+FB01>able.
Missing data                   3 o 0.1
Walking unlikely             265   1.0 Pupils whose journeys were 3þ miles
from home—inaccurate home address?
Total                     26,709 100.0


environment, and is also the point at which children of secondary
school age are allowed to claim a free bus pass from the local
authority. An hour’s walk has also been used as a reasonable cut-
off point for walking to school by other researchers (Mcdonald,
2008).
Shef<U+FB01>eld has a number of ethnic communities, many of which
comprise small numbers of people who are very unevenly spatially
distributed. Therefore for the purposes of analysis within the
multilevel model it was necessary to aggregate the detailed ethnic
categories provided in the pupil census data into four very broad
categories: white British, white other (e.g. EU, Irish), non-white
and “not known” in order to avoid the problem of common sup-
port (see below).

3.1. Correlation among school-level variables


A signi<U+FB01>cant degree of inter-correlation was found among the

school-level variables, especially BME and EAL rates (0.97), FSM

and SEN rates (0.79), as well as the SEN and EAL rates (0.59) - all of

which were signi<U+FB01>cant at p ¼ 0.01. Conversely, the school perfor-

mance results at Key Stage 4 (GCSE-level) were found to be in-

versely correlated with both SEN ( 0.74), FSM ( 0.79) and, to a

lesser degree with EAL rates ( 0.17). A variable was therefore

created to represent “cumulative” disadvantage at the school level

by summing the FSM, SEN, and EAL rates (as BME and EAL so

highly correlated). However this was not found to be signi<U+FB01>cant

and was dropped from the model at an early stage.

Faith schools were found to have lower rates of pupils eligible

for free school meals (FSM), a proxy for deprivation (t ¼4, d.f. ¼ 4,

p¼ 0.05). This may in part be due to the higher degree of control

some faith schools have over their pupil selection criteria (Allen,
2007).

3.2. Correlation among neighbourhood-level variables



Signi<U+FB01>cant correlations were also found across a range census
data at the "neighbourhood" level. In particular, the proportion of

S. Easton, E. Ferrari /


people in an output area with no access to a car or van was found to
be highly correlated with other local indicators of socioeconomic
disadvantage such as: unemployment (0.91), the rate of people in
basic (low skilled) occupations (0.89), household occupancy
(overcrowding) (0.80), and the proportion with no quali<U+FB01>cations
(0.73). Given these correlations and previous research <U+FB01>ndings
that lack of access to a car ‘… is the best single indicator of relative

deprivation’ (Voas and Williamson, 2001, p. 73), this indicator was

selected as a key variable measuring socioeconomic disadvantage

for entry into the model.


3.3. Urban form variables

The importance of urban form variables is underscored by the
distinctive geography of Shef<U+FB01>eld. Although England’s fourth lar-
gest city, it is relatively self-contained with an over-bounded ad-
ministrative geography. The city comprises a diversity of urban

archetypes ranging from dense inner-city terraces to very spacious

suburban neighbourhoods and semi-rural villages. The city’s to-

pography is hilly, which is likely to have an impact on travel mode

choice. For these reasons, it was considered important to include a

range of urban form variables in the model. The degree of corre-
lation found among the urban form variables (residential density,
population density and building density) was also found to be
signi<U+FB01>cant. Cul-de-sac density, and network junction density were
also correlated. Small but signi<U+FB01>cant correlations were also found
between distance to school and the majority of the urban form
variables, which were tested through the addition of interaction
terms in the model.


3.4. A multilevel model of travel mode

A multilevel model was constructed in which the dependent
variable was mode of commuting to school, dichotomised into
active versus motorised means of transport. A multilevel model
was appropriate because of the grouped nature of the data
(Duncan et al., 1996). The data violates the underlying principle of
standard ordinary least-squares regression models of in-
dependent, uncorrelated observations. In this case pupils are so-
cially and spatially grouped within both neighbourhoods and
schools. If grouping is ignored, this can result in an under-
estimation of the standard errors of regression coef<U+FB01>cients, which
means that statistical signi<U+FB01>cance could be over-estimated (Centre
for Multilevel Modelling, 2007). In the cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel
model employed here pupils from the same neighbourhood can

attend different schools, while pupils in the same school can come

from many different neighbourhoods (Fig. 1).














Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model showing non-
hierarchical membership of neighbourhoods and schools.
Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18                                        13


3.5. Model estimation and model <U+FB01>t

Models were estimated using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) Bayesian technique (Leckie and Bell, 2013), with initial
estimates calculated using iterative generalised least squares
(IGLS) as starting points for the MCMC estimation. The Deviance
Information Criterion (DIC) diagnostic was used to assess para-
meter signi<U+FB01>cance and the “goodness of <U+FB01>t” of the model (Browne,

2005). This diagnostic criterion balances overall model <U+FB01>t with

parsimony by penalising for model complexity (Reference Sup-

pressed for Review). A general rule of thumb is that a reduction in
the DIC of more than 5 implies a variable is signi<U+FB01>cant to the
overall model (CMM, 2007). All models were estimated using
MLwiN (Centre for Multilevel Modelling, 2014). The signi<U+FB01>cance of
the regression coef<U+FB01>cients for <U+FB01>xed effects were compared and
formally tested using the Wald test in MLwiN, which produces a <U+03C7>2
statistic. Random parts of the model, however, such as the be-
tween-neighbourhood and between-school variances were tested
by observing the reduction in the DIC (Leckie and Bell, 2013). A

“null” model was estimated with individual pupils grouped within

the two higher level classi<U+FB01>cations-neighbourhoods and schools,

but with no explanatory variables (after Leckie and Bell (2013)).

Both of the higher-level variance components – (within school)
between-neighbourhood variance and (within neighbourhood) be-
tween-school variance—were found to be highly signi<U+FB01>cant (redu-
cing the DIC by -5989 and -7831 respectively, thereby con<U+FB01>rming
the appropriateness of a cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model.

3.6. Small cell sizes

One issue with complex multilevel analysis is that the number
of individuals (pupils in this case) is broken down into numerous
categories such as school, neighbourhood, age, gender, ethnic
group, SEN status and so on which quickly results in small cell
sizes. Consequently variables such as detailed ethnic categories
and very small areas were aggregated up into larger groups and
neighbourhoods in order to ensure there were enough pupils in
each category to undertake statistical estimation. However, the
small number of pupils in some categories still restricted further
exploration of certain variables—such as the interaction between
pupils with an SEN <U+FB02>ag and gender, detailed ethnic background
and gender.


4. Results and discussion

4.1. Some descriptive statistics

The network distances between home and school ranged from

less than 100 m to 21.7 km (13.5 miles), although the data are very

skewed (see Fig. 2 below). The mean distance for all pupils was
2.7 km but the median home-school distance was just over 2 km.
The median home-school distance for pupils who walked to school
was 1.33 km (mean 1.38 km) and for those who used motorised
modes the median was 3.1 km (mean 3.9 km). For pupils living less
than one mile from school, 82% walked, although this represents a
very substantial decline over the last three decades when com-
pared to over 94% of high school pupils aged 11–17 in 1975/6
(Rigby, 1979). Despite this decline, walking rates in Shef<U+FB01>eld are
slightly higher than the national average, with just under 50% of
high school pupils recorded as walking to school (Table 1), com-
pared to 38% across Great Britain (Department for Transport,
2010).
The results of the <U+FB01>nal model are presented in Table 2. The
most signi<U+FB01>cant explanatory components in the model are be-
tween-school variation, between-neighbourhood variation and

14                                                         S. Easton, E. Ferrari /





















Fig. 2. Boxplot of active versus motorised modes of travel to school. Note–Fig. 2.
includes pupils who lived more than 3 miles away from school who were recorded
as “walking”, most of whom were excluded from the data (see Table 1).

Table 2
Results of the <U+FB01>nal cross-classi<U+FB01>ed multilevel model.

Variable                   Regression   Standard error DIC        Difference
coef<U+FB01>cient                             in model <U+FB01>t

(DIC)


Baseline DIC(in-                                         35,733
dividual pupil)

Random Components
(Within school)                                          29,744          5989

Between neigh-
bourhood
variance
(Within                                                  24,912          4832

neighbourhood)
Between school
variance
Fixed variables
Constant (intercept)     þ2.09nnn       0.39             24,913
Distance home–            2.32nnn      0.163            20,729           4184
school (km)
Gender:
Female (ref. cat)        þ0.168nnn      0.035            20,712             17

Male
Age (11-16)               0.189nnn     0.026            20,696             16
Ethnic Group:                           (altogether)     20,548            148
Not known                 0.29         0.243

White British (ref cat.)  0.286        0.15
White EU/Irish            0.727nnn     0.056
Non-white (all)
Individual SEN Status  0.671nnn        0.147            20,530             18
[Statement or

School Action þ]
IA: Age  Distance to 0.066nnn          0.014            20,503             28

School
IA: Distance            0.301nnn       0.078            20,474             29
Cul-de-sac density

nnn
signi<U+FB01>cant at p ¼0.001





distance from home to school. The improvement in model <U+FB01>t
which resulted from the inclusion of these variables far outweighs


that of the other signi<U+FB01>cant variables. This <U+FB01>nding highlights the
high levels of autocorrelation that exist across residential space as

well as within educational institutions, and the consequent
Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18


importance of taking the sociospatial clustering of individual pupils
into account in any examination of school travel patterns. Studies
such as those using survey sample data that do not group pupils
into neighbourhoods and schools may miss these higher-level ef-
fects and may have led to the over-estimation of the proportion of
variance explained by individual and urban form variables.

4.2. Route distance from home to school

After taking sociospatial clustering within schools and neigh-
bourhoods into account, distance from home to school was found
to be by far the strongest predictor of motorised travel, reducing
the DIC by 4184.6 This con<U+FB01>rms <U+FB01>ndings from international studies
on travel to school in the U.S. and Sweden (Johansson et al., 2012,
Mcdonald, 2008) and earlier studies in Britain (Rigby, 1979). As
implied by the boxplot in Fig. 2 above, the mean distances for
active (1.5 km) and motorised (3.9 km) travel were signi<U+FB01>cantly
different (t¼  98, df ¼ 25796, p ¼0.000, variances tested equal).
The mean distance from home to faith schools was signi<U+FB01>cantly
greater (3.45 km compared to 2 km for secular schools at
p¼ 0.000), which is unsurprising given that the two Catholic High
Schools in Shef<U+FB01>eld don’t have nominated de jure catchment areas
and therefore take pupils from across most of the city.

4.3. Gender

More boys walked or cycled to school than girls (the reference

group). This <U+FB01>nding accords with those studies reviewed by

Stewart (2011) where gender effects were identi<U+FB01>ed. Although
girls travelled slightly further to school (2.72 km) than boys
(2.67 km) on average, this difference was not found to be statis-

tically signi<U+FB01>cant. However, further exploratory analysis showed a


signi<U+FB01>cant difference between the proportion of girls and boys
who attended a faith school7 (<U+03C7>2 ¼ 11.9 at 1 degree of freedom,
p¼ 0.001).
Excluding the two faith schools from the analysis, signi<U+FB01>cantly

fewer girls walked and signi<U+FB01>cantly more girls travelled to school

by car (including car-sharing). Previous research has highlighted
gender differences in the level of independence granted to chil-
dren by parents (Hillman and Adams, 1992) which may involve
more restriction in public spaces and a higher level of supervision
(Stewart, 2011). Giving a child a lift rather than allowing them to
walk affords them less freedom to roam and provides increased


opportunity for parental surveillance. Johansson et al. (2012) also
found that Swedish boys were signi<U+FB01>cantly more likely to cycle
than girls. Among the tiny number (N ¼ 42, 0.2%) of pupils who
cycled to school in the study population8 the ratio of boys to girls

was over 4:1.


4.4. Age


Age was found to be positively correlated with distance tra-


velled to school. Signi<U+FB01>cant differences were found between the
mean for 11 year olds (2.5 km) and older children-14 year olds
(2.74 km, p¼ 0.01) and 15-16 year olds (2.83 km, p ¼ 0.001). So



6
Alternative models were also speci<U+FB01>ed, including one in which distance to
school was allowed to vary. However, this and several other speci<U+FB01>cations could not
be computed because the existence of a negative de<U+FB01>nite V matrix, most probably
caused by the inclusion of continuous explanatory variables. These variables and
interactions between them were considered important hypothetically and were
therefore retained; future work could consider experimentation with different
categorical and non-linear explanatory variables.
7
Possibly due to the use of academic and other selection criteria among these
schools.
8
Which may have been at its lowest in late January when the data was re-
corded due to short daylight hours and cold or inclement weather.

S. Easton,


pupils aged 14–16, on average, travelled further to school in 2009–
10. This is due to a cohort effect as the school choices available in
Shef<U+FB01>eld when the children aged 14–16 in 2009–10 started high

school (i.e. 2004–2006) were different from those available to
pupils aged 11 in 2009–10 due to a planned school closure.
An interaction term age  distance to school was created in

order to take account of this interaction. Once this interaction term

was added into the model an inverse relationship between age and
walking to school was observed. This means that older high school

pupils were less likely, on average, to walk to school compared to

11–12 year olds once distance to school was taken into account. This

may be partly due to the well-documented increased changes in
sleep pattern associated with puberty (Carskadon, 2011, Foster and
Kreitzman, 2014) putting pressure on time in the mornings for
teenagers.


4.5. Ethnic group

The mean distance between home and school was tested for

different broad ethnic categories using analysis of variance (AN-
OVA) with a post-hoc Scheffe test (Table 3). All other ethnic groups
for which data were available were found to have travelled sig-
ni<U+FB01>cantly further to school than white British pupils in Shef<U+FB01>eld in

2009–10.

Exploring variation in mean distances to school using the more
detailed ethnic categories uncovered signi<U+FB01>cant heterogeneity
among pupils from Shef<U+FB01>eld’s different ethnic communities (Ta-
ble 4). Of particular note is the fact that pupils from Black ethnic
groups travelled the furthest to school, at 4 km and over, com-

pared to an average of 2.5 km for white British pupils. Further

analysis found that this was driven by a higher propensity for

pupils from the Afro-Caribbean and ‘African–Other’ groups to at-

tend a Christian faith school, which has also been noted by other

researchers (Weekes-bernard. 2007). Somali pupils, however, did

not attend Christian schools, probably due to Islam being their

main religion of their community - yet on average these pupils

travelled the furthest of all. This may be partly due to the clus-

tering of the Somali population in particularly deprived neigh-
bourhoods in inner-city locations9 with access fewer schools

nearby.

4.6. Interaction between gender and ethnicity


A chi-squared test of mode of travel by gender by ethnic group

indicated that fewer girls from certain ethnic groups were re-

corded as actively commuting to school. Among pupils of Asian

descent, signi<U+FB01>cantly more girls travelled by car compared to boys

(<U+03C7>2 ¼23, d.f. ¼ 11, p ¼0.05), although no signi<U+FB01>cant difference was

found in distance from home to school for Asian boys and girls. In

some cultures girls may be perceived as more vulnerable or as
requiring greater ‘protection’ than boys. For example, Weekes-

bernard (2007) presents the concerns of several ethnic minority
parents speci<U+FB01>cally with regards to escorting their daughters to
school.

4.7. Special educational need status

Until now, special educational need does not seem to have been
included or described as a relevant explanatory factor in studies of
travel to school. However, the <U+FB02>ag for SEN-statement or “school-
action plus” status, which applied to 457 pupils in this dataset, was
found to be signi<U+FB01>cantly inversely associated with walking or

9
Following the arrival of many of their parents in Shef<U+FB01>eld as ref
of social housing.
E. Ferrari / Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18                                                        15


Table 3
Mean distance to school by broad ethnic category.

Ethnic category                       N       Mean distance from home to school
(km)

White British (Reference group) 20,890        2.5
“Not known”                     142           2.75n

Non-white                       5224          3.38nnn
White Irish/EU                  453           3.45nnn

n
nnn
Signi<U+FB01>cant at the 0.05 level;
Signi<U+FB01>cant at 0.001 level



Table 4
Distance to school by detailed ethnic group.

Ethnic group–detailed categories          N              Distance to school (km)

White British                             20,890         2.50
Not known                                    142         2.75
Other e.g. Yemeni                            568         2.84
Mixed-White and Black                        709         3.00
Asian Pakistani                             1459         3.05
Mixed-White and Asian                        526         3.10
Romany                                        27         3.24
White Irish/EU etc                           453         3.45

Asian-other                                  717         3.64
Black-Afro-caribbean                         243         3.97
Black-African: Other                         435         4.27
Black-African: Somali                        440         4.35


cycling to school. A t-test on mean distance to school showed that

these SEN pupils travelled signi<U+FB01>cantly further than non-SEN pu-

pils (means of 3.9 km and 2.7 km respectively). As mentioned

above, children with these types of SEN may be required to travel

further in order to access schools which are equipped to support

their particular needs. Although male pupils with this SEN <U+FB02>ag

outnumbered girls by 3:1, it was not possible to add an interaction

term between individual SEN status and distance to school or

gender into the multilevel model due to small pupil numbers.


4.8. Urban form variables

Although there has been a signi<U+FB01>cant focus on the impact of

urban form factors on commuting behaviour in recent years, the
model presented here suggests that urban form only explains a

very limited amount of the variation between pupils who com-

mute by active and motorised means. The only urban form variable

which was found to be signi<U+FB01>cant was the density of cul-de-sacs

(no-through roads). Analysis showed that taking account of dis-

tance to school, pupils who lived closer to school in areas of high

cul-de-sac density, were more likely to engage in active com-
muting. This <U+FB01>nding is in opposition to <U+FB01>ndings from some studies

in the US (see for example Schlossberg et al., 2006) and likely
re<U+FB02>ects the differences in the detailed layout of suburban arche-
types. In the US dead-end roads are typically not through routes
for pedestrians. However, post-war suburban expansion in Shef-
<U+FB01>eld, in common with many English cities, was based on variants
of the “Radburn” principle (Womersley, 1954), where road cul-de-
sacs exist alongside a traversable network of walking routes.

4.9. Variables not in the model

The proportion of households without access to a car or van
was found to be of borderline signi<U+FB01>cance (it reduced the DIC by
only 4) with an inverse relationship to walking or cycling to

ugees in need      school. This implies that pupils living in areas with less access to
private transport were in fact more likely to use motorised travel.

16                                                         S. Easton,


However, as outlined above, area levels of no/low car access have
been found to be correlated with core indicators of deprivation
(Voas and Williamson, 2001), and further exploration using ana-
lysis of variance (ANOVA) exposed an interaction between ethni-
city and levels of car ownership/access. Black Somali children were
found to live in the most “deprived” neighbourhoods as indicated
by the lowest levels of car access10. As noted above, Black Somali
pupils travelled the furthest to school on average. Pupils from the
lowest car access neighbourhoods were signi<U+FB01>cantly less likely to
cycle or walk, take a dedicated school-bus (many of which serve
faith schools), to car-share or take a tram, and more likely to more
likely to travel by car, use a public bus or bus of “unknown type”,
or travel by “other” means.
Pupil eligibility for free school meals (FSM status) was not
found to be signi<U+FB01>cant and school faith status and mean school
GCSE performance (Key Stage 4 statistics) were not found to be
signi<U+FB01>cant over and above the between school variation in the
model at the higher level.


5. Discussion and policy implications

The <U+FB01>ndings in this paper suggest that the predictors of active
school commuting are complex and conditioned by neighbour-
hood- and school-level factors as well as individual or household
characteristics. Initiatives promoting active commuting through,
for example, transport and urban design improvements will have
only limited effect if societal and sociospatial structures oblige
some groups of pupils to commute long distances-yet this is the
corollary of policies promoting school choice. The mismatch be-
tween education and transport policies has been discussed with
reference to the air quality impacts of school choice by Marshall
et al. (2010); this study provides further evidence of the mismatch
that can arise from school choice programmes.
It is also important to acknowledge that the home-school
commute is at the juncture of a number of different policy areas.
Joint working across education, housing and health policy do-
mains as well as transport will be essential to make any real im-
pact in terms of modal shift to active commuting, transport sus-
tainability and associated future budgets for transport subsidies.
For example, in terms of distance to school, optimal school-siting
within appropriate population centres, school size, residential
planning and development and policies on parental choice are all
key factors. Policies on selective schools such as grammar and
denominational schools are also implicated, as these often draw
students from much wider catchment areas (Rigby, 1979, Taylor,
2002, Parsons et al., 2000).
Currently many educational policies are working in opposition
to sustainable transport goals of local travel and low carbon cities
by driving system-wide patterns of ‘excess commuting’ (Horner,
2002) to more distant schools. Such policies may also run counter
to public health objectives to increase physical exercise among
children and reduce exposure to environmental pollution. Policies
aimed at promoting active travel that do not recognise the inter-
mediate bene<U+FB01>ts of modal switch to public transport (e.g. buses
and trains) may be unrealistic in a context of further school de-
centralisation, consolidation, and parental choice. A key priority,
therefore, is to ensure that transport planners who aim to en-
courage modal shift from private to public transport do not miss
the opportunity to work in tandem with public health of<U+FB01>cials to
focus on the bene<U+FB01>ts of public transport as a ‘mixed-mode’ form of
commuting which comprises both active and motorised

10
Probably due to the historical placement Somali refugees into
in central areas of the city.
E. Ferrari / Transport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18


components.
The core <U+FB01>ndings of this study are that mode of travel (active
versus motorised commuting) is socially patterned within both
schools and neighbourhoods. Rates of active commuting vary
primarily by school, neighbourhood, and with the length of the
home-school commute. Furthermore distance to school has been
found to vary by pupil age and ethnic background. Motorised/ac-
tive transport has been shown to vary by age, gender, ethnicity and
parental views on child independence and the need for escort
(which may be related to perceptions of neighbourhood safety).
In order to be successful, it is likely that transport policy goals
need to be grounded in the everyday reality of pupils’ travel to
school which includes taking account of route distance to school,
family schedules, parental concerns about road safety, neigh-
bourhood safety and child safety. And importantly, given that
transport choices vary by neighbourhood, pupil gender, age and
ethnicity, blanket policies across entire schools or cities may not
be appropriate. In their stead more <U+FB02>exible and responsive mea-
sures need to be developed that aim to meet the expressed need of
individual communities. For example, the possibility of organising
appropriately chaperoned walking school buses speci<U+FB01>cally for
girls might be explored jointly with some ethnic communities,
where education escort is gender-biased. At the very least, it
suggests that detailed transport planning associated with schools
needs to recognise these factors. Whilst education planning in
England does require an element of cooperation with transport
planners at the individual school level (e.g. through the production
of statutory school travel plans), it is likely that better links be-
tween education, health, transport and land use policies (for
housing planning) are needed at the ‘macro’ (e.g., city-wide) level.
While the government’s Travelling to School Initiative had some
success, its evaluation found that improvements to child health
were far from transformative—one barrier, according to local sta-
keholders, being that travel distances implied by increased school
choice (DfE and DfT, 2010). Notably, revised statutory guidance for
school travel planning in England has resulted in a less pre-
scriptive framework aimed at better re<U+FB02>ecting ‘the requirements
of today’s dynamic and increasingly autonomous schools system’
(DfE, 2014, para 2.1).
In the context of the considerable distances that some children
travel to school, walking all the way to school is unlikely to be
realistic aim (Mcdonald, 2008). Mixed-mode objectives may be
more appropriate in such circumstances: for example, campaigns
that encourage bus commuters to “walk an extra stop”, possibly in
combination with behavioural change incentives linked to bus fare
structures. On the other hand, educational travel subsidies may
provide perverse incentives, such as families deliberately opting
for more distant schools in order to qualify for a subsidised bus
pass. More in-depth, qualitative research into the reasons that
children travel long distances to school would be helpful to shed
light here.
Given the importance of socioeconomic factors associated with
distance travelled to school and modal choice, it is likely that
transport policies will impact differently on the educational out-
comes of diverse sub-populations. Transport is not simply reacting
to ‘demand’ but rather an integral to societal frameworks of op-
portunity and constraint within which education choices are ar-
ticulated. Increased pressure on public funding has already led to
the withdrawal of discretionary transport funding such as free bus
passes for children attending faith schools in some areas (Shef<U+FB01>eld
City Council, 2014). Since such schools may provide a viable al-
ternative route to higher-performing schools for low-income fa-
milies (Ferrari and Green, 2013), it seems likely that such decisions

social housing      would disproportionately affect those families and contribute to
worsening educational inequalities.

S. Easton, E. Ferrari / Tr


6. Conclusion


This paper has demonstrated that a range of individual pupil,
school-level and neighbourhood level factors are associated with
walking or being driven to school. Consistent with other studies,

the distance between home and school is found to be the most
signi<U+FB01>cant individual-level factor by far, although there are im-
portant correlates of distance that suggest systematic socio-

economic variation in the geography of school commuting. At a
time when less than half of all English pupils attend their nearest
school, rates of active commuting are likely to decline further.

Given the public health bene<U+FB01>ts of increased active commuting

among children and reduced “excess” commuting by motorised
means, serious consideration is needed of the implications and

contradictions between education policies that promote parental

choice, public health policies seeking to reduce childhood obesity/
increase levels of physical activity, and environmental policies
aimed at reducing pollution and promoting sustainable transport.


6.1. Limitations and future research


The key limitation to studies of the type reported in this paper
is the lack of hard, measured data on the actual journeys to school
made by pupils. As noted at the outset, the model of travel variable

employed in this study has several limitations, although at present
it remains the most appropriate means by which travel mode can
be analysed within individual level models. It is important to note

that the question was removed from the School Census after 2011,
limiting the potential for future work in this area. Any future
studies aiming to consider the determinants of school travel be-

haviour aimed at evaluating the impact of competing national
policies would bene<U+FB01>t from the systematic inclusion of a small set
of pupil-level school travel indicators within the pupil census data.

There remains scope to further develop the speci<U+FB01>cation of multi-

level models to ensure that they are robust.



Acknowledgements


The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the ESRC

(Grant ref.: ES/K003720/1) in funding the research on which this
article is based through the Secondary Data Analysis Initiative.
Special thanks are due to staff at Shef<U+FB01>eld City Council, in parti-

cular Mark Pearce, Martin Fox and Jeremy Hamm, for their assis-
tance in the progress of many aspects of the research project.
Eddie Bulpitt of Ordnance Survey provided invaluable help with

the integration of the urban paths data to the network model.
Responsibility for the research, its interpretation and any errors or
omissions naturally rests with the authors.



References


Aarts, M.-J., Mathijssen, J.P., Van OERS, J.M., Schuit, A., 2013. Associations between
environmental characteristics and active commuting to school among children:
a cross-sectional study. Int. J. Behav. Med. 20, 538–555.
Allen, R., 2007. Allocating pupils to their nearest secondary school: the con-
sequences for social and ability strati<U+FB01>cation. Urban Stud. (Routledge) 44,
751–770.
Banerjee, T., Uhm, J., Bahl, D., 2014. Walking to school: the experience of children in
inner city Los Angeles and implications for policy. J. Plan. Educ. Res. 34 (2),
123–140.
Bere, E., van Der horrst, K., Oenema, A., Prins, R., Brug, J., 2008. Socio-demographic
factors as correlates of active commuting to school in Rotterdam, the Nether-
lands. Prev. Med. 47, 412–416.
Browne, W.J., 2005. MCMC Estimation in MLwiN (Version 2.0). Centre for Multilevel
Modelling, Bristol.
Carskadon, M.A., 2011. Sleep in adolescents: the perfect storm. Pediatr. Clin. North
Am. 58, 637–647.
ansport Policy 44 (2015) 9–18                                                                17


Centre for Multilevel Modelling, 2007. Introduction to multilevel modelling
workshop. CMM. University of Bristol, Bristol.
Centre for Multilevel Modelling, 2014. MLwiN: A software package for <U+FB01>tting
multilevel models. CMM. University of Bristol, Bristol.
D’haese, S., de Meester, F., de bourdeaudhuij, I., Deforche, B., Cardon, G., 2011.
Criterion distances and environmental correlates of active commuting to school
in children. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act., 8.
Department for Education, 2010. Schools, Pupils and their Characteristics. London.
DfE, 2014. New Home to School Travel and Transport Guidance (consultation
published 25 March 2014). Department for Education, London.
Department for Transport, 2010. National Travel Survey: England 2010. Statistical
Release-National Travel Survey.. Department for Transport, London.
DfT, 2013. National Travel Survey: England 2013. Statistical Release Department for
Transport, London.
DfE and Dft, 2010. An Evaluation of the ‘Travelling to School Initiative’ Programme—

Final Report. Department for Education, Department for Transport,
Birmingham.
Dieleman, F.M., Dijst, M., Burghouwt, G., 2002. Urban form and travel behaviour:
micro-level household attributes and residential context. Urban Stud. 39,

507–527.
Duncan, C., Jones, K., Moon, G., 1996. Health-related behaviour in context: a mul-
tilevel modelling approach. Soc. Sci. Med. 42, 817–830.
Edina, 2014. Digimap Resource Centre. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh.
Fairhurst, M. and Edwards, D. 1996. Bus Travel Trends in the U.K.
Ferrari, E.T., Green, M., 2013. Travel to school and housing markets: a case study of
Shef<U+FB01>eld, England. Environ. Plan. A 45, 2771–2788.
Foster, R.G., Kreitzman, L., 2014. The rhythms of life: what your body clock means to
you!. Exp. Physiol. 99, 599–606.
Hillman, M., Adams, J., 1992. Children’s Freedom and Safety. Child. Environ. 9 (2),
12–33.
Hoare, R.A., 1975. The Location Ef<U+FB01>ciency of Secondary Schools. Institute of British
Geographers, Transport Group.
Horner, M.W., 2002. Extensions to the concept of excess commuting. Environ. Plan.
A 34 (3), 543–566.
Johansson, K., La<U+FB02>amme, L., Hasselberg, M., 2012. Active commuting to and from
school among Swedish children-a national and regional study. Eur. J. Public
Health 22, 209–214.
Kemperman, A., Timmermans, H., 2014. Environmental correlates of active travel
behavior of children. Environ. Behav. 46, 583–608.
Leckie, G., Bell, A., 2013. Module 12: Cross-Classi<U+FB01>ed Multilevel Models. Centre for
Multilevel Modelling, Bristol.
Lee, M., Orenstein, M., Richardson, M.J., 2008. Systematic review of active com-
muting to school and children’s physical activity and weight. J. Phys. Act.
Health, 930–949.

Mammen, G., Faulkner, G., Buliung, R., Lay, J., 2012. Understanding the drive to
escort: a cross-sectional analysis examining parental attitudes towards chil-
dren’s school travel and independent mobility. BMC Public Health, 12.
Marshall, J.D., Wilson, R.D., Meyer, K.L., Rajangam, S.N., Mcdonald, N.C., Wilson, E.J.,
2010. Vehicle emissions during children’s school commuting: impacts of edu-
cation policy. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (5), 1537–1543.
Martin, S.L., Lee, S.M., Lowry, R., 2007. National prevalence and correlates of
walking and bicycling to school. Am. J. Prev. Med. 33 (2), 98–105.

Mcdonald, N.C., 2008. Children’s mode choice for the school trip: the role of dis-
tance and school location in walking to school. Transportation 35, 23–35.
Millward, H., Spinney, J., Scott, D., 2013. Active-transport walking behavior: desti-
nations, durations, distances. J. Transp. Geogr. 28 (0), 101–110.
Newman, P., Kenworthy, J., 2006. Urban design to reduce automobile dependence.
Opolis. Int. J. Suburban Metropolitan Stud. 2, 35–52.
Parsons, E., Chalkley, B., Jones, A., 2000. School catchments and pupil movements: a
case study in parental choice. Educ. Stud. 26, 33–48.
Rigby, J.P., 1979. Review of research on school travel patterns and problems. TRRL
Supplementary Report. Transport and Road Research Laboratory, Great Britain.
Rissel, C., Curac, N., Greenaway, M., Bauman, A., 2012. Physical activity associated
with public transport use: a review and modelling of potential bene<U+FB01>ts. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health 9, 2454–2478.
Schlossberg, M., Greene, J., Phillips, P.P., Johnson, B., Parker, B., 2006. School trips:
effects of urban form and distance on travel mode. J. Am. Plan. Assoc. 72,
337–346.
Shef<U+FB01>eld City Council, 2014. Faith School Transport Consultation. Shef<U+FB01>eld City
Council, Shef<U+FB01>eld Available: <https://www.shef<U+FB01>eld.gov.uk/education/informa
tion-for-parentscarers/schooltravel/faith-school-transport-consultation.html>
(Accessed 01.09.2014).
Sirard, J.R., Slater, M.E., 2008. Walking and bicycling to school. Rev. Am. J. Lifestyle
Med. 2, 372–396.
Stead, D., 2001. Relationships between land use, socioeconomic factors, and travel
patterns in Britain. Environ. Plan. B-Plan. Des. 28, 499–528.
Stewart, O., 2011. Findings from research on active transportation to school and
implications for safe routes to school programs. J. Plan. Lit. 26 (2), 127–150.
Taylor, C., 2002. Geography of the “New” Education Market: Secondary School
Choice in England and Wales. Ashgate, Aldershot, UK.
Thomas, B., Pritchard, J., Ballas, D., Vickers, D., Dorling, D., 2009. A tale of two cities:
the Shef<U+FB01>eld project. Social and Spatial Inequalities Research Group. University
of Shef<U+FB01>eld, Shef<U+FB01>eld.
Trapp, G.S.A., Giles-Corti, B., Christian, H.E., Bulsara, M., Timperio, A.F., Mccormack,
G.R., Villaneuva, K.P., 2012. Increasing children’s physical activity: individual,
social, and environmental factors associated with walking to and from school.
