

Journal of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Transport Geography
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jtrangeo
Toward an understanding of children’s perceptions of their transport geographies:
(non)active school travel and visual representations of the built environment
Caroline Fusco a,<U+21D1>, Fiona Moola a, Guy Faulkner a,1, Ron Buliung b,2, Vanessa Richichi c,3
a
Faculty of Physical Education and Health, University of Toronto, 55 Harbord Street, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 2W6
b
Department of Geography, University of Toronto at Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road N, South Building, Mississauga, ON, Canada L5L 1C6
c
OPHEA, 1 Concorde Gate, Suite 608, Toronto, ON, Canada M3C 3N6
a r t i c l e          i n f o                            a b s t r a c t
Keywords:                                                 Environmental measures that are designed to facilitate changes in opportunities for active school trans-
Children                                                  port (AST) do not often account for individuals’ interpretations of the built environment (BE) in different
Photovoice methods                                        urban contexts. The Built Environment and Active School Transport (BEAT) project was undertaken to
Built environment                                         explore the ways in which the transport-BE interface gives rise to the use of active or non-active travel
School transport
modes as the primary travel mode for school trips. We wanted to know how children experienced and
Visual representation
Travel mode choice
understood the transport-built environment relationship. We selected four Toronto elementary school
sites in areas that differed with respect to socio-economic status and built environment. We conducted
photovoice interviews with 41 children, 21 who walked to/from school, and 20 who were driven. Adopt-
ing a thematic analytic approach, this paper examines the similarities and differences in the visual nar-
ratives of children’s transport geographies and discusses some of the bene<U+FB01>ts of using photovoice with
children in a study of the transport-built environment relationship.
Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserve
1. Introduction                                                                              within the region in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA), Canada’s larg-
est city-region. Between 1986 and 2001, the walking mode share
Active school transport (AST; primary mode is walking or                                for trips to school signi<U+FB01>cantly declined (53–42% for 11–13 year
cycling to/from school) may be an important source of children’s                             olds, 39–31% for 14–15 year olds) (Buliung et al., 2009). Partly in
physical activity (Tudor-Locke et al., 2001) and has been proposed                           response to this decline, the Heart and Stroke Foundation and
as a means of increasing youth’s physical activity (Sirard and                               the Canadian Institutes of Health Research called for proposals to
Slater, 2008).4 A recent systematic review found that children who                           study the relationship among built environments, obesity and
walk or cycle to/from school tend to be more physically active                               health. Our funded project was a 3-year, multi-scale (province, city,
overall than children who did not (Faulkner et al., 2009). Engaging                          neighbourhood) mixed-methods research study entitled Project
in active school transport may also lead to other health and transport                       BEAT-Built Environment and Active Transport. The overall goal of
bene<U+FB01>ts (Badland and Scho<U+FB01>eld, 2005), such as avoiding the direct                            this project is to develop a Toronto and Ontario speci<U+FB01>c evidence
production of harmful mobile source emissions (e.g., particulates,                           base to support the development of policies and interventions to
CO, NOx, HC). Ultimately, we are hoping that the BEAT research                               positively affect school travel behaviour in children.
project, of children’s early experiences with active transportation,                             A wide range of correlates of active commuting to school have
might have implications for future adoption of active modes for                              been studied including demographic, individual and family factors,
obligatory and/or leisure activities as children age.                                        school factors, and social and physical environmental factors (see
There is consistent evidence in western nations of a systematic                         Sirard and Slater (2008) and Pont et al. (2009) for review). How-
decline in the use of active modes for trips to school including                             ever, after reviewing the broader literature and recent reviews on
AST (Sirard and Slater, 2008; McMillan, 2005; Davison et al.,
<U+21D1> Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 416 946 7717; fax: +1 416 971 2118.
2008; Pont et al., 2009), two central limitations are evident. First,
E-mail addresses: c.fusco@utoronto.ca (C. Fusco), <U+FB01>ona.moola@utoronto.ca
research to date typically adopts a cross-sectional, survey method-
(F. Moola), guy.faulkner@utoronto.ca (G. Faulkner), ron.buliung@utoronto.ca                  ology. These methods are often based on the assumption that the
(R. Buliung), v.richichi@utoronto.ca (V. Richichi).                                          built environment is an unchanging entity, which exists indepen-
1
Tel.: +1 416 946 7949.                                                                  dently of the meanings that participants ascribe to it. Indeed,
2
Tel.: +1 905 569 4419.                                                                  parents’ perceptions of the environment are a stronger predictor
3
Tel.: +1 416 426 7415.
4                                                                                         of AST than urban form variables (McMillan, 2005). Second, as
We recognize that there are other active modes, but that the dominant active
mode is typically walking, followed by cycling.                                              others have recently noted, children’s voices have only been
0966-6923/$ - see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2011.07.001




























d.





































C. Fusco et al. / Journal
partially represented in this <U+FB01>eld of work (Mitchell et al., 2007).
The ecological and cognitive active commuting (ECAC) framework,
outlined by Sirard and Slater (2008), identi<U+FB01>ed parents as primary
decision makers in children’s commute to/from school, up to a cer-
tain age. However, children’s perceptions of the built environment
potentially feedback through household conversations about activ-
ity and travel decisions. For example, children may express their
like or dislike for walking to school or they may discuss aspects
of their environment that they enjoy or feel threatened by. Per-
haps, in the future, this feedback may be taken into consideration
when parents decide on their child’s mode of transport (Sirard and
Slater, 2008)? We contribute to the nascent literature reporting
qualitative research conducted with children around issues of ac-
tive transport and the built environment. We wanted to explore
children’s perceptions of their environments when travelling to/
from school and how these perceptions might differ depending
on the primary mode of transport (active/non-active), socioeco-
nomic status, and the transport and land use elements of the built
environment.


2. Research strategy rationale and methodology

Few studies have investigated children’s perspectives on school
travel (Mitchell et al., 2007) because the predominant approach to
researching children’s experiences is grounded in ‘research on’
rather than ‘research with’ or ‘research for’ children (Darbyshire
et al., 2005). Indeed, the views of children as active agents and
‘key informants’ in matters pertaining to their health and wellbe-
ing are often ignored and neglected (Darbyshire et al., 2005). Chil-
dren are often viewed as unsophisticated and thus incapable of
being taken seriously in discussions about their needs (Oakley,
1994). While many federal, state and local policies can have signif-
icant effects on children’s lives, especially on walking and bicycling
behaviour (Sirard and Slater, 2008), children are assumed to pos-
sess little, if any, political in<U+FB02>uence, and the exclusion of their
views in the political sphere is quite commonplace (Kulynych,
2001).
Studies that have examined children’s perceptions of environ-
ments have shown that children have meaningful and insightful
contributions to make, regarding, home, school, the availability of
places to play and eat, opportunities for social interaction, as well
as the availability of green space and climate change (Hume et al.,
2005; Holt et al., 2008; Neuwelt and Kearns, 2006; Line et al.,
2010). Research emerging from the <U+FB01>elds of child, youth and envi-
ronment studies, which draw on a variety of methods such as
interviews, writing samples, cognitive mapping and photography
demonstrate that children and adolescents are very cognizant of
the links between health, physical activity places and travelling be-
tween home and school (Mitchell et al., 2007; Holt et al., 2008;
Ross, 2007), and are able to articulate their future travel behaviour
intentions (Line et al., 2010).
Our empirically grounded research, which incorporates
researchers from diverse <U+FB01>elds of study – transportation geogra-
phy, behavioural theory, socio-cultural geographies of childhood
and physical education and health – places the voices of children
using active and non-active travel modes at the centre of the re-
search design. We used photovoice methods to explore children’s
perceptions and representations of their environments. Photovoice
is a methodology in which participants are asked to represent their
environments or point of view by taking photographs, discussing
them and developing narratives to go with their photographs.
Hurworth (2003) suggested that photovoice has three goals: to
enable people to record and re<U+FB02>ect their community’s strengths
and concerns; to promote critical dialogue and knowledge about
important issues through large and small group discussion of
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70                                          63
photographs; to reach policy makers. Photovoice as a method in
and of itself has been used to provide research participants the
opportunity to ‘‘re<U+FB02>ect on photographs that mirror the everyday
social and political realities that in<U+FB02>uence their lives’’ (Wang
et al., 1998, p. 80). Visual methods draw attention to how partici-
pants see and frame their social and cultural environments (Ball
and Smith, 1992; Carlson et al., 2006; Dell-Clark, 1999; Grbich,
2007; Rollins, 2005). This idea of seeing and framing is particularly
relevant for understanding the contextual factors that impact chil-
dren’s relationships with the mode choice process and the built ur-
ban environment, and prompted our use of photovoice. Evidence
from children’s qualitative studies has demonstrated that using
multiple methods, especially photography, effectively engages
children, allows them to document their social worlds and places
their views and experiences at the foreground of the research pro-
cess (Christensen and Prout, 2002; Darbyshire et al., 2005; Harri-
son, 2002; Mitchell and Reid-Walsh, 2002; Morrow, 2001;
Orellana, 1999; Rasmussen, 2004; Ross, 2007). More speci<U+FB01>cally,
for our purposes, photovoice has been successfully used to exam-
ine children’s conceptualizations of health (Hume et al., 2005;
Morrow, 2001) and to investigate the perceptions of elderly people
about the walkability of their built environments (Lockett et al.,
2005).


3. Sampling frame

We recognize the built environment as the fabric within and
upon which the experiences of children unfold, and hence, how
it is designed affects the construction of places and opportunities
for the types of social interaction, and observations about transpor-
tation offered by children. Hence, four elementary schools in the
GTA were selected based on differences in built form (e.g., looping
versus grid-based street layout), characteristics typically thought
to associate with systematic differences in physical activity and
travel behaviour (Frank et al., 2003). Two schools were drawn from
Toronto’s inner suburbs (e.g., typically characterized as having cur-
vilinear, looping streets, with arguably less pedestrian connectiv-
ity) and two schools were drawn from the traditional downtown
core or central area (i.e., gridded streets, with arguably higher lev-
els of pedestrian connectivity).
Beyond the built environment, we also sought to situate school
mode choice within a broader discussion of income diversity.
School selection involved an examination of school location against
median household income (Statistics Canada, 2001) up to a dis-
tance of 1.6 km around each elementary school within our sam-
pling universe (all elementary schools from the Toronto District
School Board (TDSB) with grades <U+FB01>ve and six – 10–12 years old).
Two schools were selected from within the highest income quartile
(the median household income within a 1.6 km radial distance of
the school was within the top 25% for the study area), located with-
in built environments that essentially correspond with elements of
pre-world war two traditional neighbourhood design (e.g., gridded
streets and small blocks), and the period of post-war suburbaniza-
tion (e.g., organic street design, looping streets and larger block-
size). The same sort of selection was conducted for two schools
from within the lowest income quartile. In Toronto, the distance
of 1.6 km is important because it is typically the distance within
which a school will collect 80% or more of its student population,
and 1.6 km is also the threshold distance for subsidized (free) bus-
sing services offered to elementary age students from junior kin-
dergarten to grade 5 in the TDSB.
We received ethical approval for our study from our university’s
Of<U+FB01>ce of Research Ethics and the Toronto District’s School Board’s
External Research Review Committee (ERRC). Working with tea-
cher facilitators at each school, we selected 10–11 children be-

64                                            C. Fusco et al. / Journal
tween the ages of 9 and 12 years (Grades 4–6) at each site (<U+FB01>ve
children who engaged in AST at least three times a week and 5
who used non-AST means, e.g., drive/taxi/transit/school bus, to
get to and from school at least three times a week. This age group
(Grades 4–6) was identi<U+FB01>ed based on data from our pilot study,
which tested children’s ability to articulate their experiences of
the built environment and to use digital cameras, and, in consulta-
tion with schools, this age group of children was selected because
they still traveled to school with a parent or a caregiver. With re-
spect to travel mode, the distinction between AST and non-AST
used was based on the most commonly used mode used for the trip
to or from school.
Participants responded to <U+FB02>yers that were posted in schools
and distributed by each teacher facilitator, and were invited to
take part in the study based on their willingness to participate
within the conditions and time-lines of the study. We arranged
an information night for participants (parents and children) at
each school site. At that time, parents signed a ‘Consent to Partic-
ipate’ form for their child–parent dyad and each child also signed
an ‘Assent form’. Following this, demographic information was
collected, data gathering procedures were explained to parents
and children and photovoice interview schedules were arranged
with children. Principles of protection, including pseudonyms,
the right to refuse, withdraw, or stop interviews, as well as secu-
rity and con<U+FB01>dentiality of the data were implemented. At the
information night in each site, all children (AST and non-AST)
were given an easy-to-use digital camera, and instructed on its
use. All digital cameras were pre-loaded and programmed to hold
a total of 16 photographs. Participants were instructed to take
photographs of places, objects, or things that they noticed, liked,
or disliked or those things in their environment that were impor-
tant to them during their journey to (eight photographs) and
from (eight photographs) school. Children took their eight photo-
graphs on their journey home from school the day before their
photovoice interview and eight photographs on their journey to
school on the day of their photovoice interview. All digital photo-
graphs were loaded onto laptop computers and each child partic-
ipated in a structured photovoice interview with a research
assistant in a quiet room in the school. In this interview, the
research assistant asked each child about her/his journey to
school and about her/his photographs (e.g., why they took their
speci<U+FB01>c photographs and what their photograph represented
about their journey to and from school).

4. Data analysis

While there are a variety of approaches to the use and interpre-
tation of photographic data (Hurworth, 2003), we conceptualized
the photographs as documents (Cannuscio et al., 2009), which
illustrate children’s perspectives on their built environments and
transport geographies. The visual images are treated as data that
are important for understanding children’s ideas about their jour-
ney, environment, and traf<U+FB01>c for example. While photographic
analysis alone may not be able to reveal the intent of the photog-
rapher or the meaning he/she attaches to the image (Cannuscio
et al., 2009), children’s narratives about their photographs were
used to clarify their representations. Photographs were classi<U+FB01>ed
according to the following criteria:

1. School’s name <U+FB01>rst initial: B, D, R, T.
2. Participant (parent or child): Child – C Parent – P (A concurrent
study was being conducted which involved obtaining measures
of parent’s perceptions of the environment using photovoice).
3. Participant number: 1–10 (a/b appendage if 2 children from
same household participated).
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70
4. Mode of travel to/from school (on day photograph was taken):
Active – A, Non-active – N.

For the purposes of this paper, we have coded the children’s
narratives according to their mode of travel (AST or Non-AST),
SES of neighbourhood (low or high) and built environment (grid
or looping). The photographs were analyzed for content based on
the location and subject matter of the photographs and each pho-
tograph was categorized according to the dominant theme or vi-
sual item as expressed by children in their interviews. For
example, visual items such as trees, garbage cans, schools, homes,
or stores, were identi<U+FB01>ed and coded. The next level of analysis con-
sisted of grouping together common visual items into an initial or
provisional visual theme. For example, visual items such as trees,
animals, <U+FB02>owers, gardens, and leaves were grouped into a broader
category termed the ‘‘natural environment’’. Categories were care-
fully re<U+FB01>ned in order to ensure the conceptual distinction between
categories, which led to a broad thematic analysis of children’s
visual representations. Overall, thirteen thematic categories were
identi<U+FB01>ed including: Nature/Aesthetics, Animals, Eyesores, Street
Signs/Lights, Houses/Apartment buildings, Play-areas, School and
Surroundings, Structural Features, Vehicles/Traf<U+FB01>c, Advertise-
ments/Signs, People, Commercial Enterprises, and Other Buildings.
An X-cel™ spreadsheet was developed to manage the data and this
allowed an initial analysis of the frequency of photos from these
categories on the basis of travel mode, school neighbourhood
socioeconomic status, and built environment (looping versus grid-
ded street networks).
This initial data management process sensitized the authors to
trends in the quantity of photos being taken of different catego-
ries. However, we were interested in the children’s photovoice
narratives rather than the quantity of photos being taken (see
Harrison, 2002; Ross, 2007). Using a procedure similar to the the-
matic analysis of photographs, researchers read the children’s
interviews and searched for commonly occurring themes, which
were coded and grouped together into broader thematic areas
and categories. Finally, photographs and narratives were cross-
referenced and compared to develop a broad thematic analysis
of children’s representations of their built environments and
(non)active transport.

5. Results

Some of the key similarities and differences in children’s visual
representations of their built environments and transport geogra-
phies are now described. These include: (i) home and school as
places of comfort and safety, and (ii) signs and symbols as journey
landmarks.

5.1. Similarities in visual representations

5.1.1. Home and school: journey origins and destinations
Children’s photographs and accompanying narratives, not sur-
prisingly, illustrated that their homes and schools represent places
of meaning and importance, as well as safety. These were de-
scribed as familiar, comfortable, and secure sites for children. Most
respondents (AST and non-AST) described their homes as places
where they could rest, relax, and engage in their own activities,
and they told stories about the signi<U+FB01>cance of their homes and
its surroundings in their lives.

Child: This one is the picture of our tree. And it’s really,
really tall. And its just part of me.
Interviewer: It’s part of you. What do you mean that it’s
part of you?

C. Fusco et al. / Journal












Fig. 1. Tree at house.


Child: Cause it’s always been there my whole life. This one
is also my tree. This one is really tall as well. I really like it
because it’s also been with me my whole life as well. And
like, this is my room and I can see it right there. I think
about squirrels and stuff ‘cause I always see them like
chasing each other (AST, high SES, grid) (see Fig. 1).
Children’s homes were spatial landmarks, acting as meaningful
sites of origin at the beginning of the day and a destination point at
the end of each day for both AST and non-AST children.
Similarly, regardless of the built environment context, all
participants talked about how much they enjoyed school. To them,
their schools represented a place of safety, familiarity, enjoyment
and opportunity. Children recalled school related events and
activities such as carnivals, pizza days and playground adventures
when showing their photographs of school.

Child: This is a picture of my wonderful school.
Interviewer: What do you think about your school?
Child: Its fun. . . there’s lots of special programs going on
and there’s usually pizza more than the other school I go
too. Then whenever there is pizza lunch, you are going to
pizza lunch and not staying home (AST, low SES, looping)
(see Fig. 2).

Children attending low SES schools (schools in lowest income
quartile according to the 2001 Census of Canada median household
income within a 1.6 km radial distance of the school) sometimes
expressed their disdain for living in cramped and crowded housing
complexes. This built environment and SES category interaction
with respect to housing was re<U+FB02>ected in their visual representa-


Fig. 2. School building.
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70                                             65
tions. For example, in comparison to the children who attended
high SES schools (schools in highest income quartile according to
the 2001 Census of Canada median household income within a
1.6 km radial distance of the school), children from low SES schools
took fewer photographs of their home spaces. However, overall,
home and school were depicted as important and meaningful
places in the school trip for both AST and Non-AST children be-
cause they invoked a sense of familiarity, comfort, freedom and
play.
5.1.2. Signs and symbols: journey landmarks
All participants (AST and non-AST) photographed signs in their
environments and discussed the importance of neighbourhood
signage. Both AST and Non-AST children explained that signs indi-
cated safe areas for playing, places where traf<U+FB01>c should slow down,
or where there was construction work. Children talked about using
signs for way<U+FB01>nding-signs indicated where they were and pre-
vented disorientation in the built environment. All children sug-
gested that signage helped them feel more safe and helped them
know the way to and from school. Additionally, both AST and
non-AST children suggested that signage ensured order and orga-
nization in their neighbourhoods and in the broader community.
I took a picture of that because if there was no stop signs in the
world, there would be a lot of crashes and a lot of people dying.
And everything would be out of control and no one, and there’s
not anything there to tell you what you can and can’t do. And
that’s, that sign is right when you come right out of school
the curb, is that stop sign right there (non-AST, high SES, loop-
ing) (see Fig. 3).
I think it’s important for the drivers to see it, so that the drivers
will know that people will be crossing that way and no one gets
hurt (AST, high SES, grid) (see Fig. 4).

All AST and non-AST children were fully aware of the different
types of signs in their environments. They believed that signs en-
sured both children’s personal and collective safety and thus were
important objects in their built environments.
Places such as home and school and signage conveyed a sense of
safety to many of the children we interviewed. Not surprisingly,
then, AST and non-AST children’s representations of these places
and objects were similar across the built environment categories
of the sampling frame.

5.2. Differences in representations

5.2.1. Natural and social environments: framing the school trip
Both AST and non-AST children photographed and dialogued
about the natural environment and expressed positive perceptions
Fig. 3. Stop sign.

66                                                 C. Fusco et al. / Journal


















Fig. 4. Pedestrian sign.

towards nature (i.e., trees, <U+FB02>ower beds, pathways, forests, <U+FB02>owers,
gardens, and green space). Although all children’s photographs and
interviews contained representations of the natural environment
and all children talked about it being important and meaningful,
AST children’s photographs and descriptions illustrated a type of
micro-focus on the environment, and an attention to detail that
was relatively absent in non-AST children’s photographs and nar-
ratives. While non-AST participants used generalities to describe
the environment, AST children speci<U+FB01>cally photographed and dia-
logued about leaves, <U+FB02>owers, mushrooms, etc. In this regard, their
relationship to the environment was particularly ‘‘close’’. When
they talked to research assistants about their photographs, they of-
ten spent a few minutes in the interview contemplating why or
how something appeared the way it did (e.g., a particular pattern
on a leaf or the way something grows).

This one is a picture of a really nice leaf and I took it
because it’s red and how it doesn’t really blend in with
the other colours. But it’s just on the ground, and it’s . . . just
like, it doesn’t blend so I took a picture of that (AST, high
SES, grid) (see Fig. 5).

In contrast to this speci<U+FB01>city, non-AST children used less detail
when they described the environment. Indeed, they seemed to
have a more detached relationship with the natural environment
and this was illustrated in how they were distracted sometimes
from following their thoughts about their environments.
Fig. 5. Leaves.
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70
Oh, that’s the. . .all the trees. It’s not the valley. Oh yeah, it is the
valley. It makes me think of all the trees and how pretty it is.
Yeah, and it shows the car. Yeah, because it [the valley] was
on the other side of me (non-AST, high SES, looping) (see Fig. 6).
While non-AST children talked about their af<U+FB01>nities with the
natural environment, for the most part their perspectives were
substantially different from AST children because of their position
in the car and the speed at which they travelled. Car travel allowed
them no time to stop and contemplate nature on their journeys to/
from school: instead their perspectives of the world outside the car
were often framed by the car window or blurred.
Additionally, AST children more than non-AST children talked
about the importance of friendly people-neighbours, other chil-
dren, crossing guards, parents- and animals on their way to/from
school. In this regard, AST children appeared to derive much plea-
sure and enjoyment from interacting with other human and non-
human species on their way to/from school. Seeing familiar,
friendly children and adults, and even animals, diminished feelings
of isolation and loneliness.
Child: I took this picture because I enjoy cats a lot. I’ve got
two of them at home and it’s sort of just really cute, and I
just really like that picture.
Interviewer: Yeah. What do you like about cats? Or like
seeing them on your way to school?
Child: I think it makes it much more. . . I was talking about
loneliness a couple of questions ago and when you see
these guys you are just like, ‘‘Oh I am not alone’’. It’s just,
they are sort of like a person but they’re not (AST, high
SES, grid) (see Fig. 7).

AST children’s photographs and narratives of their social envi-
ronments indicated a level of engagement not apparent in non-
AST children’s accounts. In fact, they described social interactions
on the way to and from school as important: thus there was a so-
cial bene<U+FB01>t associated with AST. Obviously, non-AST children had
fewer opportunities to interact socially with peers or other people
on their way to school: their social interaction was with their par-
ent or caregiver, whoever was driving the car. In this next quote,
one non-AST commuter demonstrated frustration with ‘social
interactions’ (with others in their cars).

That’s going into the parking lot. And sometimes it gets on
my nerves a little bit how people will turn and block off,
because they don’t think that they will block off part, and
then there’s a lot of traf<U+FB01>c. Here, we are just waiting but


Fig. 6. Trees from car.

C. Fusco et al. / Journal















Fig. 7. Cat on porch.

sometimes there’s a lot of cars and they park right by the
school door to drop off their kids. But then you have to wait
because there’s a lot of obstacles (non-AST, high SES, loop-
ing) (see Fig. 8).

Non-AST photographs of their social environments were taken
when they were not travelling, (e.g., photographs of their house be-
fore they left home in the morning in the car) or photographs of
their school buildings when they arrived at their destination
(e.g., school yard).
5.2.2. Traf<U+FB01>c: volume, control systems, and driver behaviour
Children (both AST and Non-AST) talked about many traf<U+FB01>c-re-
lated barriers to AST; drunk drivers, speeding, running red lights,
drivers talking on cell phones, reduced driver concentration, too
much road congestion, busy intersections, as well as crowded
school parking lots and drop-off zones. Children considered these
factors to be very risky for all children. Indeed, practically every
child we interviewed expressed fears of being hit by a car in a traf-
<U+FB01>c accident. Interestingly, traf<U+FB01>c fears were magni<U+FB01>ed among non-
AST children, and many took photographs of dangerous intersec-
tions or streets.

This is like the turn that goes to our street. It’s pretty sharp
because you are going so straight and then it’s like a curve
comes out of nowhere. So it’s a really sharp curve. And also
I think that adults have to be very careful at that curve
because a couple of days ago, there was this little kid on



Fig. 8. Car in parking lot.
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70                                          67
this scooter, on the way back home, he was just driving
on the curb and I heard that this car drove by and was so
close to hitting him. And I don’t think that sharp curve
should be there on, like a neighbourhood street (non-AST,
high SES, looping) (see Fig. 9).
All children (AST and non-AST) photographed busy street inter-
sections and heavy traf<U+FB01>c and expressed their disdain for high traf-
<U+FB01>c volume. However, while all children underscored how
important it was for adults to engage in safe and responsible driv-
ing and to be conscientious of children when driving, for AST chil-
dren, cars remained only one aspect of their built environments.
Despite the fact that many of these children had to cross busy
intersections, the attention of some AST children was more broadly
focused on built (planned or unplanned) environments as a whole
and not just on cars and their potential dangers.

Child: That’s where I walk to school, right there. And, by
accident, a car got into my picture. And there’s someone
doing cross country. I have got to wait at the light, and
then, that’s the way I go to school.
Interviewer: This is your pathway to school, okay. Do you
like this pathway? What do you like about it?
Child: It’s because you get to see the whole <U+FB01>eld and other
people sometimes are on your left or your right hand. If you
are walking this way [they are on] your left hand and if you
are walking back they’re on your right (AST, high SES, loop-
ing) (see Fig. 10).
While cars were thought to be a necessary and important fea-
ture of social life, many children worried that drivers could hurt
children by speeding or engaging in drunk driving. For some chil-
dren (AST and non-AST), cars were thought to make the travelling
environment hostile, and for others (AST) cars were just another
part of their urban or suburban landscape. For children living in
both low SES neighbourhoods, the frequency of photographs for
vehicles/traf<U+FB01>c was high.
While all children in the study talked about nature, social inter-
actions and traf<U+FB01>c, AST and non-AST representations of these as-
pects of their transport geographies were qualitatively different.
Children’s perspectives and visual representations were directly
related to their mode of transport and appeared to be less directly
in<U+FB02>uenced by factors related to the built environment or socioeco-
nomic status of the school neighbourhood.


6. Discussion, conclusions, research and policy implications
We believe that the development of domestic policy around AST
requires local evidence. While it appears likely that policy
Fig. 9. Streetscape from car.

68                                                   C. Fusco et al. / Journal


















Fig. 10. Intersection and traf<U+FB01>c lights.


decisions at the school, local, state or federal level have an indirect
effect on active commuting to/from school (Sirard and Slater,
2008), in the policy making/reform process, children’s views are
rarely taken into consideration. We set out to qualitatively explore
children’s experiences and perceptions of AST and non-AST jour-
neys to and from school and believe that our <U+FB01>ndings extend cur-
rent literature on children’s AST by adding children’s visual
narratives into the discussion of transport geographies.
Signi<U+FB01>cantly, the use of photovoice to document AST and non-
AST children’s perceptions of their transport modes and the built
environment gave child research participants an opportunity to
represent salient aspects of their school travel experience and
the environments within which school travel occurs in ways that
researchers (and perhaps other adults in their lives) would not
know otherwise. The inclusion of visual methodologies in research
supports a move towards the new sociology of children’s health and
children’s geographies; where ‘‘the child’’ is thought to be an agentic
health subject who is able to make valuable, competent, informed,
and meaningful contributions towards research agendas that affect
their lives directly (Aitken, 2001; Darbyshire et al., 2005; Mayall,
1998). Using photovoice to understand children’s everyday geogra-
phies of transport to and from school demonstrates our commit-
ment to inclusive child-centred methods, children’s diverse and
multiple forums of expression and communication, and recognizes
children’s agency in the production of research knowledge.
While parents/guardians remain the key decision-makers
regarding AST (Faulkner et al., 2010), this paper demonstrates that
children’s perceptions and understandings of their environments
are sophisticated, unique and should be considered when planning
for AST. Our study’s <U+FB01>ndings add to Mitchell et al.’s (2007) research
on children’s experiences of the space between home and school in
Auckland, New Zealand. Mitchell et al. used the concept of ‘‘island’’
geography to describe the perceptions and experiences of children
who were driven to and from school. They concluded that these
children were only cognizant of the places that they were chauf-
feured to and from. With reduced ecological acuity, it is proposed
that they are ‘‘seeing more and learning less’’ (p. 616). These chil-
dren did not engage with the ‘‘local spaces in between’’, which are
critical to learning about the environment. In our study, AST chil-
dren took more photographs of nature/aesthetics (e.g., gardens,
plants, trees, <U+FB02>owers) and built environment features (e.g., side-
walks, curbs, roads) than non-AST children. Mitchell et al. suggest
that the physical and social worlds available to children who are
driven are shrinking and that there may be ‘‘a generation of chil-
dren who are largely unfamiliar with their local neighbourhoods’’
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70
(p. 616). This con<U+FB01>rms what ecologists and environmental psychol-
ogists call the extinction of experience. In ecology, the extinction of
experience refers to the estrangement of people from nature in a
fast moving urban world, and the subsequent apathy toward con-
servation and preservation that follows this estrangement (Pyle,
1978; Miller, 2005).
Non-AST children in our study were neither oblivious to, or
uninterested in, their environments and indeed lamented that
travelling by car prevented them from ‘‘slowing down to take an-
other look’’ at interesting things on the way to and from school.
AST of course occurs more slowly than non-AST – this difference
in the speed of movement also affords opportunities for re<U+FB02>ection
and provides enough time for the ‘‘environment’’ to actually cogni-
tively register with AST children. These children remembered de-
tails and told stories about their environments because they
experienced moving through them at a slower pace than would
be the case if they were driven. If a goal of the parent driver is to
optimize the travel time (see Faulkner et al., 2010) then the goal

becomes one of ‘‘getting to school’’, i.e., travel for the sake of get-
ting to the activity at the destination, rather than the travel unrav-
elling or being experienced as an activity in its own right, that is
then followed by the school activity.
The observed interaction between mobility and environment, in
fact, reminds us of the work of Rapoport (1987) who proposed that
people travelling in motorized vehicles perceive less detail within
the travel environment, while those travelling by active modes
such as walking or biking are able to acquire a more detailed rep-
resentation of the activity and travel environment. The perceived
sense of distance from ‘natural’ and/or planned green space offers
evidence in support of the hypothesis that the rise of the mobile
society may indeed be producing increased estrangement from
natural environments (Miller, 2005). The data also support Kahn’s
(2002) contention that the ‘‘seeds of estrangement’’ may be
planted in childhood. Thus, if we want a generation of children
and young people to grow up with attachments to the environ-
ment, policy measures may need to promote AST as a means to in-
crease opportunities of environmental engagement. Moreover,
policies that are more broadly directed at how children and youth
travel to school and other activities should consider this estrange-
ment problem.
Regardless of the mode of transport to school, all the children in
this study appear to recognize the importance of home, school and
street signs. The presence of some similarities across the subject(s)
of their photography, arguably, demonstrates that these ‘sites’ and
signs are equally important to and affect all school aged children,
generally, regardless of travel mode (walking or driving in this
study). Children’s attention to signs in this study con<U+FB01>rms Mitchell
et al.’s (2007) <U+FB01>ndings: they note that young commuters are aware
of drivers’ carelessness and often take responsibility for their own
safety by paying attention to signs. Children’s reference to school
and home as meaningful places con<U+FB01>rms sociology of childhood
and cultural geography studies that suggest that for children home
and school are simultaneously places of belonging and comfort, as
well as sites of power relations and control (Holloway and
Valentine, 2000; Mayall, 1998; Mitchell and Reid-Walsh, 2002).
Children’s depictions of home and school in this study might
‘‘. . . reproduce the same spatial ideology that children’s place is
in the home [or school]. . .’’ (Holloway and Valentine, p. 17).
However, their incursions into public spaces (particularly through
AST journeys to/from school, even though under the guidance of an
adult or caregiver) and their photovoice stories of those journeys
demonstrate that children ‘‘can and do participate in decisions
about themselves that seem to call into question the idea that by
de<U+FB01>nition as children, they are innocent and unknowing’’ (Mitchell
and Reid-Walsh, 2002, p. 7).

C. Fusco et al. / Journal
Finally, the in<U+FB02>uence of SES on children’s AST is not clear with
current research demonstrating positive, negative, or insigni<U+FB01>cant
relationships between SES variables and travel mode (Sirard and
Slater, 2008). The <U+FB01>ndings from our photovoice interviews do indi-
cate some differences in representations between children who at-
tend schools in neighbourhoods differentiated by SES. We did <U+FB01>nd
that children from high SES neighbourhoods tended to take more
photographs of nature and street signs and fewer photographs of
traf<U+FB01>c and people compared to children from low SES neighbour-
hoods. Mitchell et al. (2007) demonstrated that children’s safety
concerns are highest in low socioeconomic status schools, and
Kearns et al. (2003) concluded that, as pedestrians, children from
lower SES neighbourhoods encounter greater safety risks on the
way to school. This is particularly important given that children
in low SES neighbourhoods may tend to use active modes more

than others – in other words, children from low SES neighbour-
hoods are engaged in the ‘‘desired’’ outcome (AST) but are
burdened by lower quality infrastructure to support active trans-
portation (Mitra et al., 2010).

Although we found that participants in our study did not expe-
rience their school travel in homogeneous ways, their photovoice
narratives could be used to advocate for increasing rates of AST.

If policy makers want to improve AST rates across SES groups
and urban form, then the profound socio-economic disparities that
exist in metropolitan areas like the Greater Toronto Area need to be

addressed or AST promotion will fail (McDonald, 2008). Addition-
ally, AST promotion initiatives and interventions need to pay atten-
tion to the diversity of children’s perceptions of their transport

geographies in order to develop SES and built environment-speci<U+FB01>c

programs. Concurrently, policy makers need to tackle issues of
parental convenience and work schedules directly (Faulkner
et al., 2010), as well as developing child-centred interventions

and school transport policies that re<U+FB02>ect children’s perceived ben-
e<U+FB01>ts of AST and their everyday experiences of the built environ-
ment. A cautionary note, however. Kearns and Collins (2003)

argue that while children’s journeys between home and school
have become increasingly problematic in Western cities as a result
of intensifying traf<U+FB01>c and safety concerns, taken-for-granted AST

initiatives (e.g., walking school buses) offer participants a highly
ambivalent form of empowerment and spatial freedom that is con-
tingent upon adult surveillance and disciplinary power (p. 193).

The children, within the age group we investigated (Grades 4–
6), are still controlled and in<U+FB02>uenced by their parents’ decision
making about school trip mode (see Faulkner et al., 2010). Indeed,

parents reported that although their children engaged in discus-

sions about school travel plans, most often, they (the parents)
did not take their requests seriously and based their family school
travel plans on what was the ‘‘quickest and easiest’’ journey to

school (Faulkner et al., 2010). However, AST and non-AST chil-
dren’s photovoice stories, which depict the kinds of relationships
that they can have with their environments when engaging in

AST (see also Mitchell et al., 2007), point to children as possible
agents of change with respect to active transport geographies – if
their stories are proactively taken up in ways that allow children’s

co-construction of a socially and environmentally just public
sphere (Sutton and Kemp, 2006).
Finally, given our <U+FB01>ndings to date, we advocate a longitudinal

study that tracks whether early adoption of active school transport
(AST) can potentially give rise to longer-term improvements in
health status, with active travel decision-making becoming part

of the adult experience. It is important to conduct research of this

sort across different places with a view to being able to contrast
local nuances with themes that arise universally across studies.
Given the importance of children’s independent mobility in

explaining physical activity levels (Page et al., 2009), understand-
ing the perceptions and experiences of school-aged children should
of Transport Geography 20 (2012) 62–70                                                            69
continue to drive research interests in the geographies of AST and
built environments.


Acknowledgments

This research was funded by the Built Environment, Obesity and
Health Strategic Initiative of the Heart and Stroke Foundation and
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).
We would like to thank Raktim Mitra, Doctoral Candidate,
Department of Geography and Program in Planning, University of
Toronto, for providing technical and study design assistance on
the BEAT Project.


References

Aitken, S., 2001. Geographies of Young People: The Morally Contested Spaces of
Identity. Routledge, London.
Badland, H.M., Scho<U+FB01>eld, G.M., 2005. The built environment and transport-related
physical activity: what we do and do not know. Journal of Physical Activity and
Health 2, 435–444.
Ball, M., Smith, G., 1992. Analyzing Visual Data. Sage, New Bury Park, CA.
Buliung, R., Mitra, R., Faulkner, G., 2009. Active school transportation in the Greater
Toronto Area, Canada: an exploration of trends in space and time (1986–2006).
Preventive Medicine 48 (6), 507–512.
Cannuscio, C.C., Weiss, E.E., Fruchtman, H., Schroeder, J., Weiner, J., Asch, D.A., 2009.
Visual epidemiology: photographs as tools for probing street-level etiologies.
Social Science and Medicine 69 (4), 553–564.
Carlson, E., Engebretson, J., Chamberlain, R., 2006. Photovoice as a social process of
critical consciousness. Qualitative Health Research 26, 836–852.
Christensen, P., Prout, A., 2002. Working with ethical symmetry in social research
with children. Childhood 9 (4), 477–497.

Darbyshire, P., MacDougall, C., Schiller, W., 2005. Multiple methods in qualitative
research with children: more insight or just more. Qualitative Research 5, 417–
436.
Davison, K., Werder, J., Lawson, C., 2008. Children’s active commuting to school:
current knowledge and future directions. Preventing Chronic Disease 5, 1–10.
Dell-Clark, C., 1999. The autodriven interview: a photographic view<U+FB01>nder into
children’s experiences. Visual Sociology 14, 39–50.
Faulkner, G., Buliung, R., Flora, P., Fusco, C., 2009. Active school transport, physical
activity levels and body weight of children and youth: a systematic review.
Preventive Medicine 48, 3–8.
Faulkner, G.E.J., Richichi, V., Buliung, R.N., Fusco, C., Moola, F., 2010. What’s
‘‘quickest and easiest?’’: parental decision making about school trip mode.
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 7, 62.
Frank, L.D., Engelke, P.O., Schmid, T.L., 2003. Health and Community Design: The
Impact of the Built Environment on Physical Activity. Island Press, Washington,
DC.
Grbich, C., 2007. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Introduction. Sage, London.
Harrison, B., 2002. Seeing health and illness worlds – using visual methodologies in
a sociology of health and illness: a methodological review. Sociology of Health
and Illness 24 (4), 856–872.
Holloway, S., Valentine, G., 2000. Chidren’s Geographies: Playing, Living, Learning.

Routledge, London.
Holt, N.L., Spence, J.C., Sehn, Z.L., Cutumisu, N., 2008. Neighborhood and
developmental differences in children’s perceptions of opportunities for play
and physical activity. Health and Place 14 (1), 2–14.
Hume, C., Salmon, J., Ball, K., 2005. Children’s perception of their home and
neighborhood environments, and their use association with objectively
measured physical activity: a qualitative and quantitative study. Health
Education Research 20 (1), 1–13.
Hurworth, R., 2003. Photo-interviewing for research. Social Research Update 40.
<http://sru.soc.surrey.ac.uk/SRU40.html> (retrieved 29.06.09).
Kahn Jr., P.H., 2002. Children’s af<U+FB01>liations with nature: structure, development, and
the problem of the environmental generational amnesia. In: Kahn, P.H., Jr.,
Kellert, S.R. (Eds.), Children and Nature: Psychological, Sociocultural, and
Evolutionary Investigations. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 93–116.
Kearns, R., Collins, D., 2003. Crossing roads, crossing boundaries: empowerment and
participation in a child pedestrian safety initiative. Space and Polity 7, 193–212.
Kearns, R., Collins, D., Neuwelt, P., 2003. The walking school bus: extending
children’s geographies? Area 35, 285–292.
Kulynych, J., 2001. No playing in the public sphere: democratic theory and the
exclusion of children. Social Theory and Practice 27 (2), 231–264.
Line, T., Chatterjee, K., Lyons, G., 2010. The travel behaviour intentions of young

people in the context of climate change. Journal of Transport Geography 18,
238–246.
Lockett, D., Willis, A., Edwards, N., 2005. Through senior’s eyes: an exploratory
qualitative study to identify environmental barriers to and facilitators of
walking. Canadian Journal of Nursing Research 37 (3), 48–65.
Mayall, B., 1998. Towards a sociology of child health. Sociology of Health and Illness
20 (3), 269–288.
