

Modeling Frequency and Duration of
Out-of-Home Participation in Physical
Activity by School-Age Children
Muhammad Ahsanul Habib and Naznin Sultana Daisy

This paper investigates the frequency and the duration of participation
in physical activity by children who go to school in the city of Dhaka,
Bangladesh. The study uses data from a 2012 activity-based travel diary
survey of 245 students in Grades 6 to 10 in the Dhaka metropolitan area.
To explore the trade-offs between factors that affect the frequency of
out-of-home physical activity, including the use of active transportation,
this study used a zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP) regression model. Addition-
ally, parametric hazard models were estimated to examine the duration
of physical activities. The results of the ZIP count model suggest that
personal and household characteristics, attributes of the built environ-
ment, and time commitments for other mandatory and discretionary
activities influence the frequency of participation in physical activity.
For example, an increase in the number of children in the household and
the presence of sidewalks increased the frequency of out-of home, out-
of-school physical activity if everything else was held equal. In contrast,
travel time to school, the presence of traffic intersections, and the time
commitment for tutoring sessions negatively affected participation in
physical activity. In the modeling of the duration of out-of-home physi-
cal activity, this study found that a Weibull parametric hazard model
outperformed a log logistic model. The duration was influenced by
sociodemographic characteristics, spatial context, and escort arrange-
ments. For instance, car ownership and a parental escort increased the
duration of physical activity. The paper offers an in-depth behavioral
understanding of children’s physical activities in a developing country.


This paper presents findings on models of the participation in and
the duration of physical activity by children who go to school in the
city of Dhaka, Bangladesh. Children’s regular physical activities
directly affect their physical and mental health. Participation in daily
physical activities and the use of active transportation during child-
hood help reduce the risk of a number of serious health problems
(1). Transportation researchers are increasingly becoming interested
in the study of participation in physical activity and time use because
of paradigm shifts toward activity-based travel behavior analysis
and the potential association between the built environment and
levels of participation in physical activity (2, 3).
The focus of analysis in existing activity-based research has
predominantly been on the activity–travel patterns of adults (4).

Dalhousie Transportation Collaboratory, School of Planning, and Department of Civil
and Resource Engineering, Dalhousie University, P.O. Box 15000, Halifax, Nova
Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada. Corresponding author: M. A. Habib, ahsan.habib@dal.ca.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 2357, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,

D.C., 2013, pp. 116–124.
DOI: 10.3141/2357-14








However, the participation in physical activity and travel character-
istics of children are unique; for example, they participate in many
fixed activities, such as attending tutoring sessions (i.e., special-
ized daily lessons from private tutors in a fixed location outside the
school curriculum), and require escort arrangements for out-of-home
activities. Therefore, children should be treated as a distinct group,
and in-depth investigations are required to understand the deter-
minants of their physically active travel patterns and activities (5).
This paper aims to explore the factors that affect the frequency of
physical activities, including the use of active transportation, and
the duration of such activities.
Although several authors have recently investigated children’s
activity patterns in the context of developed countries, studies of
children in the context of developing countries are limited. Given
the changing complexity of urban life in many developing countries,
it is necessary to examine how children are participating in physical
activities within that context. Recent economic growth and changing
family structures in many cities in developing countries are altering the
pace of people’s lives and their patterns of activity, which are affecting
children’s participation in physical activity and their health. In fact,
little is known about the activity and travel patterns of children in
many high-density cities in emerging economies.
Recent evidence suggests that the rapid densification of cities is
reducing the amount of public space and environments conducive
to walking in many neighborhoods of populous cities. Traffic con-
gestion, pedestrian safety, and personal security concerns further
restrict children’s use of physically active forms of transportation and
engagement in out-of-home physical activities. In this context, this
study attempts to fill some gaps in the understanding of the physical
activity patterns of children in Dhaka, which is one of the megacities of
the world. The paper specifically investigates the frequency and dura-
tion of out-of-home physical activities of children who go to school
through the use of data from an activity-based travel diary survey.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: it begins with a brief
review of the recent literature in the modeling of participation in
physical activity and the duration of such activity. Next, it provides
an overview of the data that form the basis of the subsequent estima-
tion of a model. This is followed by a discussion of the empirical
results. Finally, the paper concludes with a summary of the study’s
contributions.


Literature Review


The physical and psychosocial well-being of children is challenged
by the decline in children’s involvement in physical activities in
recent years (6). Since the 1970s, the percentage of children who


116

Habib and Daisy


are overweight has more than doubled, and the rates among adoles-
cents have more than tripled in the United States (7). The American
Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children be physically
active for at least 60 min/day (8). Such physical activity can include
structured activities, such as sports and school-based physical edu-
cation classes, or activities promoted through an active lifestyle,
including outdoor play and walking or biking for daily travel. How-
ever, studies suggest that a significant percentage of school-aged
children in developed countries, including the United States (6),
Canada (9), and Australia (10), fails to meet this recommended level
of daily physical activity.
In developing countries, because of rapid urbanization and increased
competition for land, open spaces and playfields are disappearing
and are being replaced by different profit-generating land uses (11).
Places for outdoor recreation for children are therefore shrinking
at a fast pace, and fewer places for outdoor recreation reduce the
opportunities for out-of-home physical activities. Recent economic
growth and increased rates of auto ownership are further influencing
the way in which children are traveling to school and to other activi-
ties. Additionally, the changing patterns of family life (for instance,
patterns in which both parents work and work longer hours) are
negatively affecting children’s opportunities to play outdoors and
to use active transportation because both types of activities require
suitable arrangements to be made to have children be accompanied
(12). Increased traffic congestion, road safety issues, and personal
security concerns are also possibly contributing to reduced amounts
of out-of-home activities in exchange for in-home recreational
activities.
Because evidence from activity-based travel behavior research in
the context of cities located in developing countries (such as Dhaka) is
limited, children’s activity patterns and travel behaviors are mostly
unknown. This study attempts to fill some gaps, mainly through
investigation of the determinants of the frequency and duration of
children’s participation in physical activity, which include the use
of active transportation, such as walking and biking.
The body of recent activity-based travel behavior research is
enormous in both the North American and the European contexts.
The literature on participation in and the amount of time spent on dif-
ferent types of activities includes studies on the home-stay duration
of in-home activity episodes (13), mandatory skeletal activities (14),
shopping (15), intershopping (duration between successive shop-
ping episodes) (16), out-of-home nonwork activities (17), recreation
(18), and social activities (19). Several studies have investigated the
amount of time spent on multiple activities by consideration of the
total time allocation for all activities (20) as well as modeling of joint
activities (21). Activity generation and scheduling processes have
also been investigated to microsimulate activity patterns (22).
The current activity-based transportation research follows two
major streams: (a) the instances of activities and the time allocation of
individuals (13, 14, 19, 20) and (b) activity generation and scheduling
models (22). In the transportation field, the main purpose of modeling
of activities is to contribute to the development of activity-based
travel models. The majority of studies, however, have focused only
on modeling of adults’ activities. Because children are often required
to be chauffeured by adults, modeling of the activity generation and
the scheduling process of the adults has perhaps been given higher
priority in earlier studies. Copperman and Bhat (4) argue that most
children (those younger than 16 years of age) do not have a choice to
drive and do not put extra cars in the transportation network; it may
be presumed, therefore, that less attention is given to the modeling
of children’s participation in activity and travel patterns.
117


Several recent studies have contributed to the analysis of chil-
dren’s activity patterns and have included analyses of children’s
participation in leisure activities (23), weekend physical activities
(24), and discretionary activities (25) and teenagers’ recreational
activities (26). Earlier research also examined children’s out-of-home
time use (27) as well as the use of active transportation, specifically,
the mode choice for travel to school (28). Copperman and Bhat
found that children spent, on average, 3.5 h on recreational activities
during weekdays (24). Another study suggested that almost 26% of
students in Grades 9 to 12 do not participate in any form of extra-
curricular activities after school (27). Sener and Bhat investigated
children’s engagement in discretionary leisure activity (25). The
study suggested that children spent the largest amount of time at
home on in-home passive activities, such as watching television,
playing video and computer games, and communicating via electronic
devices.
Many studies have established linkages between children’s
physical inactivity and conditions in the home, the built envi-
ronment (e.g., walkable streets), and the availability of outdoor
facilities for physical activity within reasonable distances (1).
The lifestyle of children is becoming more sedentary as a result
of technological changes as well. Time spent on the Internet, com-
puters, video games, and hand-held electronic devices is supplanting
time devoted to structured and spontaneous physical activities
outside the home (29). Levels of physical activity are also influ-
enced by the need for children to be accompanied, road safety, and
personal security issues for children. Parents are allowing children
to stay home instead of engaging in outdoor activities, particularly
if the neighborhood is not conducive to walking (30). Moreover,
longer distances from home to other activity locations reduce the
probability that children will use active forms of transportation
(31). The time budget is also an issue, because children need to
participate in more fixed organized activities after school (such as
homework) than adults. Given the complexity of the factors that
might affect children’s ability to participate in physical activity,
further research is required to better understand their participation
in physical activity.
In general, children’s physical activities are investigated through
the use of information on the amount of time that they use for struc-
tured and unstructured physical activities recorded in activity diary
surveys. In contrast, when activity-based data are not available,
only the use of active transportation is investigated (32). This study,
however, investigates engagement in both of these types of physical
activity.
Several methodological approaches have been used in the activ-
ity analyses described in the literature. Sener and Bhat have pro-
posed a discrete–continuous modeling method that requires enormous
amounts of data (such as in-home and out-of-home time allocations of
activity as well as detailed travel attributes for all types of activities),
which are difficult to obtain for Dhaka (25). For modeling of single
types of activities, several authors have used count data models,
such as Poisson regression models (33), to explain the frequency of
participation in activity. Because of the existence of excessive zeros
(i.e., no participation in physical activities), the study described in
this paper used a zero-inflated Poisson (ZIP) model. For analysis of
activity duration, the proportional hazard model is the most widely
used. Previous transportation studies, however, have provided con-
siderable evidence that the assumption of a proportional effect within
the proportional hazard model is violated (19). As such, this paper
examines a parametric accelerated failure-time hazard model. Appli-
cations of such models are still limited in transportation and related

118


fields, specifically, in the modeling of the amount of time that children

spend on physical activity. The next section sets out the methodology
used in this paper.


Methodology

Zero-Inflated Poisson Regression Model
In the modeling of the frequency of children’s participation in physi-
cal activity in Dhaka, this study estimates a ZIP regression model.
To illustrate the modeling approach taken in this paper, let yi be the
number of physical activities in which child i participates in on a
given day. Then, a Poisson model can be written as


exp ( -µ i ) µ iyi
P( yi ) =                                                                 (1)
yi !



where P(yi) is the probability that child i will participate in yi activities



and µi is the expected value of yi, E(yi), which can be represented as




E ( yi ) = µ i = exp (ßX i )                                             (2)


where ß represents a vector of regression parameters to be estimated,
and Xi is a vector of variables describing children’s personal and
household characteristics, attributes of the built environment, and
other relevant conditions that affect the frequency of participation
in physical activities.
One important property of this Poisson model is that it restricts the
mean and variance of the distribution to equality [i.e., E(yi) = var(yi)],
which limits its use for modeling of the overdispersion in the count
data set. A particular kind of overdispersion occurs when more zeros

than are consistent with a Poisson distribution are present in the data.
For instance, a large proportion of respondents may not be found to
engage in any physical activity on a given day. In this study, about

43% of children in Dhaka reported no physical activity during the

weekday surveyed.

Because the number of zero observations was quite high, the basic

assumption of a Poisson model was violated and the use of a zero-

inflated methodology was therefore required. A suitable approach

for analysis in such a case is use of a ZIP model, which assumes

that two latent classes contribute to the excess zeros (34). Within the

context of physical activity, the first latent class consists of a sub-

group of children who never participate in any physical activity and

will continue not participating. The second latent class consists of a

subgroup that reports no physical activity but that is more amenable

to the idea of participation in physical activity and has the potential

to increase their physical activity. They simply have not yet reached

a reporting threshold beyond zero; therefore, they are a part of the
Poisson process (35).
The ZIP model tackles excess zeros mathematically by changing

the mean structure to allow zeros to be generated by a dual-state
process. Let <U+03C8>i represent the probability that the response Yi for the
ith child is necessarily zero. Then, the probability that an outcome of
zero will be observed, P(Yi = 0), and the probability that any particular
nonzero count will be observed, P(Yi = yi), can be written by the
following two equations:

P (Yi = 0 ) = <U+03C8>i + (1 - <U+03C8>i ) exp-µi                                      (3)
Transportation Research Record 2357


µ iyi exp-µi
P (Yi = yi ) = (1 - <U+03C8>i )                                                (4)
yi !

where 0 < <U+03C8> < 1 so that it incorporates more zeros than the Poisson
model allows (i.e., Equation 1). The conditional expectation and
variance of Yi [E(yi) and V(yi), respectively] are given as

E (Yi ) = (1 - <U+03C8>i ) µ i                                                 (5)

V (Yi ) = (1 - <U+03C8>i ) µ i (1 + <U+03C8>i µ i )                                   (6)

where V(Yi) > E(Yi) for <U+03C8>i > 0, unlike the Poisson model (in Equation 1),
in which the expected value equals the variance.
Estimation of this ZIP model requires maximization of a combined
log likelihood function (L) for the response variable, yi, obtained

from the relationships in Equations 3 and 4:

<U+F8EE> K yi = 0 loge ( <U+03C8>i + (1 - <U+03C8>i ) exp i )
-µ
<U+F8F9>

n
<U+F8EF>                                              <U+F8FA>
L = <U+2211><U+F8EF>                      <U+F8EB>            µ iyi exp-µi <U+F8F6> <U+F8FA>
i =1 <U+F8EF> + K y > 0 log e (1 - <U+03C8>i ) +
<U+F8EC><U+F8ED>                          <U+F8FA>
<U+F8F0>
i
yi ! <U+F8F7><U+F8F8> <U+F8FB>
N
= <U+2211> K yi = 0 loge ( <U+03C8>i + (1 - <U+03C8>i ) exp-µi )
i =1

+ K yi >0 ( loge (1 - <U+03C8>i ) + yi loge µ i - µ i - loge yi !)        (7)

where K is an indicator function for the given event. The parameters
µi and <U+03C8>i can be obtained via the following link functions:

loge (µ i ) = ßX i                                                      (8)

<U+F8EB> <U+03C8>i <U+F8F6>
loge <U+F8EC>           = <U+03C9>Z i                                                 (9)
<U+F8ED> 1 - <U+03C8>i <U+F8F7><U+F8F8>


As mentioned earlier, Xi is a vector of variables that describes fac-

tors affecting nonzero outcomes. Zi, however, represents a vector of

regressors that explain membership to the zero state. ß and <U+03C9> are

the corresponding parameters. Although the estimation of two sets

of regressors is possible, a potential identifiability problem may not

render meaningful interpretation of the resulting two sets of param-

eters (36). Therefore, this paper restricts, loge (<U+03C8>i/1 - <U+03C8>i) so that

it is equal to t0, a constant with an assumption that the probability

of membership to the zero-state latent class is identical for all

observations. Now, only ß parameters are required to be estimated

in relation to the Xi regressors. In this application, parameter esti-

mates are obtained by the use of the expectation and maximization

algorithm (37) to maximize the log likelihood function defined in

Equation 7.



Hazard-Based Duration Models

To enhance the understanding of the factors that affect the amount
of time spent on physical activities, the paper uses a continuous-time
hazard-based duration modeling approach. Hazard models recognize
the dynamics of the duration of physical activity of children on
a given weekday because the likelihood of termination of physical
activity is measured on the basis of the amount of time spent from the
initiation of an activity. The key principles and statistical properties of

Habib and Daisy


the hazard-based duration models have been discussed by Hougaard
(38). Let T be a continuous, nonnegatively valued random variable
representing time until the termination of a physical activity of a
given child. If the probability that the child will terminate the event
within a short interval, <U+0394>t, at or after t is P(t = T < t + <U+0394>t | T = t), then
the hazard function, <U+03BB>(t), which is the instantaneous rate of failure
at t, can be written as


P ( t = T < t + <U+2206>t T = t )      f (t )   f (t )
<U+03BB> ( t ) = lim                                 =           =             (10)
<U+2206>t <U+2192> 0               <U+2206>t               1 - F (t ) S (t )

where f(t) represents the probability density function. The cumulative
distribution function is F(t) = P(T = t), and the survival function is
S(t) = P(T > t) = 1 - F(t).
This basic hazard model formulation can be extended to different
types of model structures, including semiparametric and parametric
models. In semiparametric models, the baseline hazard function
[<U+03BB>0 (t)] is assumed to be parametrically unspecified. The most widely
used semiparametric model, introduced by Cox (39), is given by

<U+03BB> ( t , x ) = <U+03BB> 0 ( t ) exp ( x ( t ))                                  (11)

where x(t) is the vector of observed covariates and <U+03BB>0(t) is the baseline
hazard, which is not parametrically specified.
In contrast, the parametric models assume a specific distribu-
tion defining the baseline hazard function. Although it is possible to
uncover the baseline distribution in semiparametric models, paramet-
ric models are preferred in this study because they provide a direct
inference on the dependence on duration. Empirical applications in
different research fields have used a wide variety of distributions for
the parametric models. This paper examines a monotonic (Weibull)
and a nonmonotonic (log logistic) distribution for the parameterization
of the baseline hazard. The hazard rates for Weibull and log logistic
distributions, respectively, are given as follows:

<U+03BB> ( t ) = <U+03D5>p (<U+03D5>t )
p -1
(12)


<U+03D5>p (<U+03D5>t )
p -1

<U+03BB>(t ) =                                                                 (13)
(1 + (<U+03D5>t )p )

where f is a positive scale parameter and p is the shape parameter.
For a Weibull model, when p is <1, the baseline hazard decreases
monotonically, and vice versa. For a log logistic model, the hazard
decreases monotonically if p is =1, but it takes a nonmonotonic
shape if p is >1, increasing from the origin (t = 0) to a maximum
of t = ((p - 1)1/p)/f) and decreasing thereafter as t approaches
infinity.
To accommodate the effects of external covariates in the models,
this paper assumes that the covariates directly rescale time. This
accelerated failure time assumption implies that the covariates either
accelerate or decelerate the termination of physical activity dura-
tion. Now, by specification of the scale parameter f = exp(-ß'x) for
the Weibull and log logistic models, the model can be expressed as a
log-linear model of duration (T):

loge (T ) = ß'x + e                                                     (14)

where ß' is a vector of parameters for the external covariates x, and
e is a stochastic error term with a Type I extreme value distribution.
119


The parameters of the parametric hazard models are estimated by
the use of full information maximum likelihood estimation proce-
dures, unlike the partial likelihood estimation procedures used in
semiparametric models (38). The likelihood function of the model
can be written as

N                  N
L = <U+220F> f ( ti , xi ) = <U+220F> [ <U+03BB> ( ti , xi )][ S ( ti , xi )]            (15)
i =1               i =1


where N represents the number of observations, and ti is the activity
duration for the ith activity. xi represents external covariates.
The corresponding hazard and survival functions for the Weibull
and log logistic models in Equation 15 generate the log likelihood
functions for each type of parametric model. Maximization of the
resulting log likelihood functions provides ß' parameters for exter-
nal covariates and the shape parameter (p) for the baseline hazard
functions. The final model is selected on the basis of the Akaike
information criterion (AIC). The lower that the AIC value is, the
better is the model.


Data Used for Empirical Application

Activity-Based Travel Survey

This study used data from an activity-based travel survey, which
was conducted in 2012 among students from Grades 6 to 10 in the
metropolitan area of Dhaka, Bangladesh. Each student reported all
engagements in activity over a 24-h period for the surveyed weekday.
A stratified random sampling method was used to recruit participants
to take the survey. First, schools from two parts of the Dhaka metro-
politan area (north and south) were chosen. With the approval of the
administrations of the selected schools, the survey was presented to
the students. Then, the participants were recruited with the help of the
teachers.


Students completed an activity-based travel diary, mainly report-
ing various types of structured and nonstructured in-home and out-
of-home activities for the given weekday. The structured activities



involved those in which they regularly participated, such as extra-
curricular pursuits, lessons, enrichment activities, scouting, clubs, and
organized games and meets. In contrast, the nonstructured activities
included unorganized hobbies and sports, outings, playing, tele­vision
viewing, and listening to music. The travel diary also collected detailed
information about the activity, such as the start time, end time, loca-
tion, travel mode used, travel time, travel cost, any accompanying
person, and the number of accompanying people for different types of
activities. This questionnaire was completed in the classroom under
the teachers’ supervision.
A second questionnaire for parents was designed to collect socio-
economic and other relevant information and was distributed to the
students. Parents completed the questionnaire at home and returned
it to the teacher within a specified time period. Information col-
lected through this survey included the age of the parent, household
income, car ownership, tenure type, household size, employment
status, number of children, and their associated travel arrangements.
Because geographic information system-based detailed data on
the built environment are currently unavailable for Dhaka, parents
were also asked to report certain attributes of the built environment
around their homes, such as the presence of sidewalks and the presence
of traffic intersections nearby. In total, 510 surveys were distributed;

120                                                                                                              Transportation Research Record 2357


however, only 276 complete responses were obtained. After the                       acteristics, and other relevant attributes were merged for hypothesis
responses were cleaned for missing information, responses from                      testing during the modeling process.
245 participants were found to be usable for further analysis.
Summary Statistics
Data Preparation
The descriptive analysis revealed that among the 245 respondents,
Paper-based surveys were coded in SPSS. Data preparation for this                   about 57% engaged in at least one physical activity. The average count
study involved several stages: data entry and validation, preparation of            of physical activity was approximately 1.41, with a standard deviation
the database (i.e., data tables and relationships), preparation of a code           of 1.45 (minimum = 0 and maximum = 6). The average (total) dura-
book, and running of queries to generate data sets for modeling. The                tion of activity of the surveyed children was 33.69 min on a given day,
activities reported by the students were initially recoded on the basis             which is below the level recommended by the American Academy of
of the activity typology used by Bhat and Lockwood (40).                            Pediatrics. In total, 356 continuous episodes of physical activity were
Structured query language-based data queries were applied to                     reported. The average continuous length of physical activity in the
identify out-of-home nonschool activities (sports, playing at a park                sample was 23.18 min, with a standard deviation of 24.92 min and a
or playfield, social activity, extracurricular activity, etc). In this study,       maximum of 150 min. These continuous episodes (sometimes referred
participation in physical activities included engagement in activities              to as a “spell” or a “bout” in the literature) were used as the dependent
in which the child was physically active as well as the use of active               variable in the modeling of the duration of physical activity.
transportation, such as walking. Because mode choice was identified                    Table 1 shows the summary statistics of the dependent variables
separately in the survey (i.e., the information was not included in                 considered in the ZIP model and the duration model and the inde-
the chronological reporting of activities), queries were used to identify           pendent variables (such as children’s personal attributes, household
and merge attributes required for this type of physical activity within             socioeconomic characteristics, built environment, escort arrangement,
the data set. Reported travel time was considered the duration of the               and activity attributes) retained in the final model specification.
physical activity if active transportation was used to reach any type
of out-of-home activities. For other structured and nonstructured                   Discussion of Models
activities, the duration was calculated on the basis of the start time
and the end time of the reported activities. Finally, an activity-based             Modeling Process
data set was generated for modeling of duration. A person-based data
set that identified total counts of participation in physical activity by           Before the modeling was performed, tests for correlations between all
each student on a given weekday was generated for ZIP modeling.                     pairs of explanatory variables were performed. Variables that exhib-
In both cases, children’s personal characteristics, household char-                 ited low correlations (<0.4) among pairs of independent variables


TABLE 1   Summary Statistics of Variables Used in Models

Variable                                                                                                 Mean or Percentage      SD           Min.     Max.

Dependent Variables
Physical activity count                                                                                           1.41             1.45          0         6
Duration of physical activity (min)                                                                              23.18            24.92          5       150
Independent Variables
Person and household attributes
Age of children (years)                                                                                       14.13              1.154       11         16
Number of children in household                                                                                1.83              0.77         1          4
Age of parents                                                                                                42.54              5.19        25         58
Monthly household income (2012 US$)                                                                          331.39            284.14       150      2,800
Total household size                                                                                           4.33              0.86         3          7
Home ownership (dummy, 1 if the household is a homeowner; 0 otherwise)                                        29.5%                 na       na         na
Car ownership (dummy, 1 if the household owns at least one car; 0 otherwise)                                  11.2%                 na       na         na
Built environment
Presence of sidewalk around home (dummy, 1 if sidewalk exists adjacent to the home; 0 otherwise)               43.7%                 na      na         na
Presence of intersection nearby home (dummy, 1 if any intersection exists near home; 0 otherwise)              41.6%                 na      na         na
Activity attributes
Parental escort (dummy, 1 if the child is accompanied by a parent; 0 otherwise)                                40.2%                 na      na         na
Accompanied by friends (dummy, 1 if the child is accompanied by friends; 0 otherwise)                          49.4%                 na      na         na
Activity performed in playfield or park location (dummy, 1 if the activity is performed in playfield           12.9%                 na      na         na
or park location; 0 otherwise)
Total travel time to school (min)                                                                             48.30             29.69         5        150
Total travel time to tutoring (min)                                                                           17.37             19.24         5         85
Duration of mandatory activity (min)                                                                         813.37            101.19       480      1,065
Duration of homework (min)                                                                                   281.97             84.75        15        570
Duration of tutoring (taking lessons from a tutor outside school in a fixed time and location) (min)         127.62             94.01         0        360
Number of out-of-home out-of-school activities (passive)                                                       1.61              1.53         0          4

Note: SD = standard deviation; min. = minimum; max. = maximum; na = not applicable.




































































Habib and Daisy


were considered in the final model specification. For example, house-
hold income was correlated with car and home ownership, but car
ownership and home ownership were not correlated with each other.
Therefore, household income was not considered with the correlated
variables (car and home ownership) in the same model. Various
model specifications were tested with a comprehensive list of vari-
ables identified in the existing literature. The final model was selected
on the basis of the model fit, agreement with prior hypotheses, and the
statistical significance of explanatory variables.


Model Results for Frequency of Participation
in Physical Activity

The parameter estimation results of the ZIP count model that

examined the frequency of participation in physical activity among

children who go to school in Dhaka are presented in Table 2.

The majority of independent variables retained in the ZIP model

were statistically significant at least at the 95% confidence interval

(i.e., t-statistics were greater than 1.96 for a two-tailed test). Few

variables exhibited t-statistics less than the threshold value. These

variables were retained in the final model because they offer important

behavioral insights, with the assumption that if a larger set of data

was available, these parameters might show statistical significance.

The model results suggest that the key determinants of the frequency

of participation in physical activity are the presence of sidewalks

around the home, the presence of a traffic intersection nearby, and

the total number of out-of-home, out-of-school activities performed

by the children. Although the presence of sidewalks increases the

frequency of physical activity, the presence of a traffic intersection

nearby decreases the frequency of participation, with all else being

equal. The relative contributions of the presence of sidewalk and

intersection were 0.513 and -0.454, respectively.



TABLE 2   Parameter Estimation Results of ZIP Regression
Model for Frequency of Participation in Physical Activity

ZIP Regression Model

Variable                                        Coefficient        t-Statistic

Age of children                                    -0.086            -1.65
Number of children in household                     0.137             1.73
Age of parents                                     -0.029            -2.92
Total household monthly income (US$)               -0.001            -1.71
Presence of sidewalk around home                    0.513             3.61
(dummy, 1 if sidewalk exists adjacent
to the home; 0 otherwise)
Presence of intersection near home                 -0.454            -2.91
(dummy, 1 if any intersection exists
near home; 0 otherwise)

Duration of tutoring                               -0.002            -2.18
Duration of homework                               -0.001            -1.81
Total travel time to school                        -0.008            -2.39
Total travel time to tutoring                      -0.027            -3.95
Number of out-of-home out-of-school                 0.552             7.21
activities
Constant                                            2.986             3.37

Note: Data are for 245 individuals. Log likelihood of the constant-only
model = -371.94646; log likelihood of the full model = -276.65103;
pseudo-rho-square = .256207.
121


Of children’s personal characteristics, age exhibits a negative
relationship, implying that older children participate in physical
activity less frequently than younger children. This finding is con-
sistent with the prior expectation. Older children usually take more
household responsibilities and are required to spend more time on
their studies. The model results also suggest that the frequency of
physical activity increases for a given child as the number of children
in a household increases. The presence of multiple children in a
household presumably results in greater opportunities for out-of-home
physical activities. For instance, parents may allow a younger child
to go to a nearby playfield with his or her older siblings. Similarly,
children can walk or bike together to school or other places close
to their home.
The age of the parent was also found to be significant in the model.

A negative parametric value of the variable suggests that children

with an older parent had a lower propensity to participate in out-of

home physical activity. Recent evidence suggests that younger par-

ents in Dhaka are more educated and health conscious than parents of

the previous generation. As such, they are possibly more concerned

about their children’s health and may try to offer an increased number

of opportunities for engaging in physical activities.

The results also reveal that household monthly income has a

negative impact on children’s physical activities. Poor facilities

for walking or biking as well as road safety and personal security

concerns often make outdoor activities less desirable for children in

Dhaka. Hence, parents with greater purchasing power might prefer

to arrange for sedentary in-home activities for their children by pur-

chasing electronic devices (such as video games, hand-held gaming

devices, and computers) as a means to provide alternative recreational

activities.

As indicated earlier, attributes of the built environment exhibit a

significant influence on the frequency of out-of-home activities of

children in Dhaka. Walking is an incidental physical activity that
depends on the quality of the built environment, such as the avail-
ability of sidewalks in the residential neighborhood. As expected,
the sign of the dummy variable, the presence of a sidewalk around
the home, is positive, which means that children’s rates of partici-
pation in out-of-home physical activities will increase if sidewalks

are available near their home. In addition to the potential use of
active transportation for trips over short distances, the availability of
sidewalks may also offer possibilities for children to engage in out-
of-home activities in a nearby playfield or park that can be reached
by walking or biking.
Another aspect of the built environment that affects participation
in physical activity is the presence of traffic intersections near the
home. This dummy variable is used as a proxy variable to account
for traffic interference. As expected, the coefficient value of this
variable is negative. Traffic intersections raise road safety concerns,
and children need to be accompanied to travel to locations where
out-of-home physical activities can be performed. As such, it is

hypothesized that the presence of an intersection near the home
decreases the frequency of participation in out-of-home activities,
which is confirmed by the results of the model with reasonable
statistical significance (at the 99% confidence level).
The results of the model also reveal that activity-related attributes
influence participation in physical activity, particularly certain fixed
activities that are considered nearly mandatory in the context of
developing countries. For instance, private tutoring before or after
school is common in Dhaka and is considered mandatory because

the level of education provided in the schools does not match parents’
expectations. As expected, the total time commitment for tutoring is

122                                                                                                                       Transportation Research Record 2357


found to affect negatively the frequency of participation in physi-                      of the constant-only model. The pseudo-rho-square value was 0.256,
cal activity. Similarly, the total amount of time spent on homework                      which indicates a reasonable model fit.
(mainly in the home) is found to reduce the amount of time spent on
out-of-home physical activity, with all else being equal.
Dhaka has no designated school-zone boundary for any public or                       Model Results for Duration of Physical Activity
private school. Students compete for admission to quality schools,
which in many cases could be far from their homes. Therefore, the                        The parameter estimation results for the model for the of duration
total travel time to the school could be an important factor explain-                    children’s physical activities are presented in Table 3. As mentioned
earlier, monotonic (Weibull) and nonmonotonic (log logistic) base-
ing participation in physical activity. It is hypothesized that the longer
line distributions were assumed in the duration model. The models
it takes for a child to reach school, the lower the frequency of out-
were evaluated according to the AIC. The model results suggest
of-home physical activity will be. Because travel over a longer
that the Weibull model outperforms the log logistic model. The AIC
distance increases the total time spent for schooling, opportunities
value of the Weibull model (86.36) was considerably lower than
for a child to engage in discretionary types of physical activities are
that of the log logistic model (94.16). Hence, the Weibull model
reduced. Additionally, if a school is far from home, the possibility
was selected as the final model. All variables in the Weibull model
that a child can walk to school might be reduced. A similar effect
were statistically significant at least at the 99% confidence interval.
was expected for the total travel time to attend a private tutoring                      Because the shape parameter (p) of the Weibull model was greater
location (which is extra routine travel for the child). As expected,                     than 1, the effect of duration is monotonically increasing and vice
the parameter values of the travel time to school and the tutor-                         versa. This study takes an accelerated failure-time assumption;
ing location were found to be negative for the sample: -0.008 and                        therefore, the interpretation of the effects of the explanatory variables
-0.027, respectively.                                                                    is quite straightforward. A positive coefficient for a variable in the
Finally, the results of the ZIP count model suggest that the increase                model implies that the duration of physical activity increases with
in the total number of out-of-school and out-of-home passive activi-                     an increase in the value of that variable.
ties (such as grocery shopping with parents) increases the frequency                        The final model results reveal that car and home ownership, escort
of participation in physical activity by children and vice versa.                        arrangements, and activity location (a dummy variable, if the activity
Increased numbers of out-of-home activities perhaps create oppor-                        is performed in a playfield or park) are the most important predictors
tunities to walk to take short trips, which are common in Dhaka, which                   of the duration of physical activity for the sample of children from
predominantly has an urban structure based on mixed land uses.                           Dhaka. Among the children’s personal characteristics, the parameter
Several other variables were tested during model estimation.                         of age was found to have a negative value, which implies that the
However, those hypotheses could not be confirmed because of a lack                       duration of activity per activity episode for older children is less than
of reasonable statistical significance. For example, it was hypoth-                      that for their younger counterparts. Household size also influences
esized that the mother’s employment status could have an impact on                       the duration of physical activities, which shows a positive parametric
the frequency of children’s participation in physical activity since                     size. If the household size is larger, the opportunity to arrange for
households in which both parents work might have scheduling chal-                        children to be accompanied is presumably higher, which might
lenges. The dummy variable exhibited poor statistical significance,                      increase the duration of an activity episode.
however. The goodness-of-fit statistics of the model were evaluated                         In addition, the parameter of the age of the parent is positive in
according to the pseudo-rho-squared value, which indicates 1 minus                       the model. This finding implies that children of older parents spend
the ratio of the log likelihood of the full model to the log likelihood                  more time on an activity episode than those of younger parents.



TABLE 3   Results of Parametric Hazard Models for Duration of Physical Activity

Log Logistic Duration
Weibull Duration Model             Model

Variable                                                                                              Coefficient       t-Statistic      Coefficient       t-Statistic

Age of children                                                                                         -0.120             -2.42           -0.087             -1.70
Household size                                                                                           0.099              2.21            0.058              1.17
Age of parents                                                                                           0.032              3.86            0.024              2.46
Car ownership (dummy, 1 if the household owns at least one car; 0 otherwise)                             0.363              2.47            0.399              2.62
Home ownership (dummy, 1 if the household is a homeowner; 0 otherwise)                                  -0.271             -2.39           -0.213             -1.89
Parental escort (dummy, 1 if the child is accompanied by a parent; 0 otherwise)                          0.218              4.56            0.131              2.59
Accompanied by friends (dummy, 1 if the child is accompanied by friends; 0 otherwise)                   -0.212             -4.41           -0.124             -2.45
Duration of mandatory activities (time spent in school and sleeping)                                    -0.004             -8.93           -0.004             -7.41
Duration of homework                                                                                    -0.004             -5.07           -0.003             -5.34
Activity performed in a playfield or park location (dummy, 1 if the activity is performed                1.560              6.54            1.746              6.46
in playfield or park location; 0 otherwise)
Constant                                                                                                 6.057              6.79             6.045              6.30

Note: Data are for 356 activities. Shape parameter = 3.353 and 5.019 for Weibull and log logistic duration models, respectively; log likelihood for the constant-only
model = -109.44 and -82.42 for Weibull and log logistic duration models, respectively; log likelihood for full model = -29.18 and -33.08 for Weibull and
log logistic duration models, respectively; AIC = 86.36 and 94.16 for Weibull and log logistic duration models, respectively.











































































Habib and Daisy


The ZIP count model (discussed in earlier) suggests that children of
older parents have less of a chance to engage in physical activities.
Collective interpretation of the results of the two models allows the
conclusion that although children of older parents have the chance to
engage in fewer physical activities, they spend a longer time engaged
in an activity than children with younger parents.
The home ownership dummy showed a negative coefficient value
(-0.271). This result implies that the duration of physical activity is
shorter for children whose parents own their own home than for
children whose parents are tenants. This variable acts as a proxy
for household income, because homeownership is costly in Dhaka.
Car ownership was, interestingly, found to have a positive effect on
the duration of time that children engaged in out-of-home physical
activity. Participation in organized out-of-home physical activities
generally requires a vehicle. If convenient transport is available,
children can easily travel farther to get involved in activities at places
where more organized extracurricular physical activities are available.
As a result, they can possibly spend more time per activity episode
than those who do not have access to a private vehicle.
Escort arrangements were also found to be significant as an
explanation for the duration of out-of-home physical activities. The
dummy representing parental escort showed a positive coefficient
value in the duration model. This finding indicates that the time
spent on out-of-home physical activities by a child is longer if the
child is accompanied by his or her parents. In contrast, if a child is
accompanied by friends only, the duration is shorter for a particular
out-of-home physical activity.
The model results also show that the amount of time spent on
mandatory activities and homework reduces the amount of time spent

on out-of-home physical activities. This is because when more time

is allocated to fixed activities, less time is available for discretionary

activities, such as physical activities. Finally, the dummy representing

playfields or parks as activity locations exhibits a positive parameter

value. The duration of activities in those locations will be longer

because children might get involved in sports or other types of

organized physical activity.



Conclusion

This paper presents the findings of models that investigated children’s
physical activities in Dhaka, Bangladesh. A ZIP regression model
was used to explore the frequency of children’s physical activities,
including the use of active transportation. The results of the ZIP
model reveal that the key determinants of the frequency of out-
of-home participation in physical activity are attributes of the built
environment. It was found that although the presence of sidewalks
increases the frequency of physical activity, the presence of traffic
intersections nearby decreases the frequency of participation.
Parametric hazard models were used to examine the determinants
of the duration of physical activity episodes. The results suggest that
a Weibull model outperforms the log logistic model according to
model fit. Parameters estimates revealed that car ownership, tenure
type, activity location, and escort arrangements are the most notable
predictors of the duration of physical activity. For instance, parental
escort increases the duration of physical activities and vice versa.
The results of both models offer some interesting behavioral
insights. It was found that older children engage in fewer physical
activities and also spend less time per activity episode than their

younger counterparts. However, although children of older parents
get fewer chances to engage in physical activity, they spend more time
per activity than children of younger parents.
123


This paper contributes in several ways. Although abundant analy-
ses of adults’ activity are available, less attention has been given to
the determination of children’s activity patterns. This study enhances
the understanding of these patterns. This is a pioneering study in the
context of Dhaka that takes an activity-based approach to the analy-
sis of children’s time use and travel behavior. Because studies on
participation in physical activity and time-use patterns for children
who go to school are surprisingly absent in the context of developing
countries, this study fills the gap, specifically in the provision of an
understanding of the factors affecting participation in out-of-home
physical activities, including the use of active transportation.
The study has certain limitations. Parents’ detailed activity patterns
(except for information on escort arrangements) were not collected
to reduce the burden on the respondents. Future studies should
consider collection of this type of information because children’s
participation in physical activity is closely related to the availability
of time and the schedule of their parents. In addition, because of the
small sample size, the study could not examine separately physically
active out-of-home activities and active travel on journeys to evaluate
whether different factors influence each of these. Furthermore, this
study could not examine the day-to-day variation in the levels of
participation in physical activity because only 24 h of data were
available from the activity diary. It would be interesting if a sub­
sequent study could focus on duration analysis for a multiweek period
in the context of a developing country through a panel survey.
The immediate next task with the data from this study is to examine
the factors affecting nonparticipation (i.e., zero instances), which
were assumed to have a fixed probability in the ZIP model proposed

in this paper. However, such an examination could be challenging,

given the small sample size. It would be useful if a larger set of data

could be examined.

The findings presented in this paper have important policy impli-

cations. The model results provide evidence that the provision of

sidewalks in residential neighborhoods will increase the frequency of

participation in physical activity in Dhaka. Preservation of playfields

and parks is also important, because playfields and parks are rapidly
disappearing from the city because of the high demand for housing
and other uses of the land. The city should also consider demarcation

of school-zone boundaries to reduce longer trips to school for children
in Dhaka’s congested network. Furthermore, the quality of public
schools should be improved so that the need for additional tutoring
(a fixed activity) can be reduced. Such initiatives will allow more
time for physical activities that are essential for the physical and
psychosocial well-being of the children in the developing nation of
Bangladesh.


Acknowledgments

This research was funded by a Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Canada grant from the Canadian Bureau for International Education.
The authors thank Sarwar Jahan of the Bangladesh University of
Engineering and Technology for his valuable suggestions on the
survey design and implementation.


References

1. Dunton, G. F. Assessing the Social and Physical Contexts of Children’s
Leisure-Time Physical Activity: An Ecological Momentary Assessment
Study. American Journal of Health Promotion, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2012,
pp. 135–142.
