

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION
2017, VOL. 11, NO. 5, 342–356
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2016.1253803
Perceptions of cycling among high school students and their parents
Debbie Hopkinsa                 and Sandra Mandicb
a
Transport Studies Unit, School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; bSchool of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise
Sciences, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
ABSTRACT                                                                                                                           ARTICLE HISTORY
Cycling is a healthy, low-cost, and low-carbon alternative to motorized transport. As a relatively fast active                     Received 30 March 2016
mode of transport, cycling can overcome the distance barrier of walking, while also providing cardiovascular                       Revised 23 October 2016
exercise and reducing demand for motor vehicle travel. The “cycling renaissance” has seen an increase in                           Accepted 24 October 2016
the number of cyclists in urban spaces, and there is evidence of increased investment in cycling                                   KEYWORDS
infrastructure and cycle skills training in some places. Yet the number of high school students cycling to                         Cycling; New Zealand;
school is declining in many industrialized countries. Transport to school is a major contributor to daily traf<U+FB01>c                   parents; qualitative researc
congestion, resulting in both local and global environmental concerns, and high school students have been                          safety; students; transport
relatively overlooked in research to date. In this paper, we present empirical material from a qualitative                         school
study of high school students and parents in Dunedin, Aotearoa New Zealand. Focus group sessions were
conducted during 2014 and 2015 with students and parents separately, to explore their perceptions of
modes of transport and transport to school decision making. Key <U+FB01>ndings relate to perceived safety, implicit
messages, and social norms. We <U+FB01>nd that a complex range of factors contribute to perceptions of cycling
safety, including features and perceptions of the built environment, traf<U+FB01>c safety (including behaviors of
other road users), previous cycling experiences (including accidents), and adolescents’ cycling skills and on-
road experiences. Overcoming concerns through behavioral and cultural interventions coupled with
upskilling and thoughtful infrastructure may present a pathway to increasing rates of cycling.
1. Introduction                                                                       2004; Kerr et al., 2006; Lorenc, Brunton, Oliver, Oliver, & Oakley,
2008) particularly as a result of parental perceptions of child safety
Cycling is an important part of a low-carbon transport transition.
(Murray, 2009; Woldeamanuel, 2016). Parental con<U+FB01>dence in the
Unlike walking which can be perceived to be slow and cumbersome
child’s cycle skills is another determinant of cycling to school levels
(Krizek, Forsyth, & Baum, 2009), cycling offers a faster mode for
for children (Trapp et al., 2011; Ducheyne, De Bourdeaudhuij,
negotiating the urban environment, escaping the congestion and
Spittaels, & Cardon, 2012) and this mediates the association
parking stresses of private car travel, and negating the associated
between parental perceptions of safety and cycling in children
greenhouse gas emissions. The “cycling renaissance” has seen a
(Trapp et al., 2011).
resurgence of interest in cycling among particular groups in the
To date, most research related to active transport to school
global north1 (Pucher, Buehler, & Seinen, 2011). Yet in terms of
has focused on the experiences of primary and intermediate
transport to school, with a few exceptions [e.g. Belgium (Van Dyck,
school students, often neglecting high school students. Yet the
De Bourdeaudhuij, Cardon, & Deforche, 2010) and Denmark
mobility experiences of this age group are likely to continue
(Cooper et al., 2006), the Netherlands (Dessing, de Vries, Graham,
through to adulthood, thus instilling mobility expectations and
& Pierik, 2014), and Japan (Mori, Armada, & Willcox, 2012)],
aspirations that support cycling is critical. In the present study,
most industrialized countries report historically low rates of cycling
high school students and parents of high school students are
to school [e.g. the United States (McDonald, 2007), Canada (Larsen
the unit of interest. This paper draws from qualitative material
et al., 2009), Spain (Chillon et al., 2009), Ireland (Nelson, Foley,
gathered through focus group sessions conducted in Dunedin,
O’Gorman, Moyna, & Woods, 2008), Australia (Leslie, Kremer,
Aotearoa New Zealand (New Zealand hereafter), in which per-
Toumbourou, & Williams, 2010), and New Zealand (Mandic et al.,
ceptions of transport modes were discussed. The present paper
2015a)]. The perceived danger of cycling, and the potential for col-
focuses in particular on high school students’ and parental per-
lisions with motorized vehicles have been highlighted as particu-
ceptions of cycling in general and cycling to school.
larly strong barriers, limiting the uptake of cycling as a mode of
transport (Kerr et al., 2006; Ahlport, Linnan, Vaughn, Evenson, &
Ward, 2007), also known as utility cycling (e.g. Smith, 2016).
2. Literature review
Parents have also been identi<U+FB01>ed as critical “gatekeepers” to the
uptake of active transport to school (Black, Collins, & Snell, 2001;                  Incidental exercise achieved through daily activities includ-
Carver, Timperio, Hesketh, & Crawford, 2010; Jago & Baranowski,                       ing active transport to school (ATS) results in a range of
CONTACT Debbie Hopkins             debbie.hopkins@ouce.ox.ac.uk     Transport Studies Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 2JD, UK.
1
The term “global north” is used to denote economically developed/industrialized countries, which includes New Zealand and Australia.
© 2017 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC














h;
to






























































well-articulated and oft-reported bene<U+FB01>ts for health, well-
being and the environment. The promotion of physical
activity has traditionally centered on sport and exercise
(Dobbins et al., 2009), but there is a growing recognition of
the positive outcomes that result from ATS, particularly for
children and adolescents. These include the development of
independence and space for relaxation. Yet in recent years,
active transport (e.g. cycling and walking) to school has
been replaced by motorized travel.
Cycling is widely encouraged due to its positive impact on
health and well-being, as well as on air pollution and road traf-
<U+FB01>c congestion (Daley & Rissel, 2011). Yet there are declining
rates of cycling to school across the global north (Department
for Transportation, 2013; McDonald, 2007; McDonald & Aal-
borg, 2009; New Zealand Ministry of Transport, 2015). Barriers
to cycling can include insuf<U+FB01>cient or inadequate physical
cycling infrastructure (e.g. separated cycling lanes, bicycle
racks), but also perceptual factors (Daley, Rissel, & Lloyd, 2007;
Willis, Manaugh, & El Geneidy, 2015; Ghekiere et al., 2016).
Positive perceptions of cycling (Willis et al., 2015), perceptions
of cycling as an environmentally neutral, rather than carbon-
intensive transport mode, and awareness of the contribution
cycling can make to daily physical activity (Daley & Rissel,
2011) have also been identi<U+FB01>ed as factors that stimulate the
uptake of cycling.
Nevertheless, there is considerable heterogeneity in percep-
tions of cycling as a transport mode. These diverse perceptions
of cycling can relate to experiences of cycling, socially deter-
mined norms around cycling and perceptions of cyclists, and
the compatibility of cycling with local transport infrastructure.
Cycling can be undertaken as a sport, a recreational activity, or
a mode of transport, and each activity is perceived differently
(Horton, Rosen, & Cox, 2007). For the purpose of this paper,
we are speci<U+FB01>cally referring to cycling as a mode of transport,
while also acknowledging the complex intersection of cycling
for transport and leisure.
The system of cycling requires speci<U+FB01>c materialities (e.g.
bike, lights, helmet, and footwear) and competencies (e.g. how
to cycle) but is still a transport mode of relatively low cost and
complexity. Consequently, cycling has a long and interwoven
history with daily-life and social activities. In the global south,
bicycles have historically offered a low-cost and often culturally
embedded means of transport, but this culture is becoming
replaced with aspirations for motorized transport. In the global
north, the necessity to transition to a more sustainable system
of transportation has prioritized, and in some cases politicized,
the transition toward active, low-carbon transport modes
(Norcliffe, 2015).
In order to increase the rates of cycling, a wide range of

interventions have been trialed across different populations
(e.g. children, adults, and subsets) (see Yang, Sahlqvist,
McMinn, Grif<U+FB01>n, & Ogilvie, 2010 for a review of interventions),
and speci<U+FB01>cally related to transport to school (see: Weigand,
2008). Evidence of the effectiveness of cycling intervention pro-
grams is limited (Lorenc et al., 2008). Lorenc et al. (2008) sug-
gested that this could be because interventions often focus on
built environment factors, such as bicycling lanes, and neglect-
ing socio-cultural factors including perceptions of safety and
cultures of automobility (Lorenc et al., 2008). A relationship
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION        343
between the construction of bicycle lanes and increased rates
of cycling to school has been proposed, yet this assumption is
supported by limited empirical evidence (McMillan, 2005),
and the relationship between bicycle lanes and the uptake of
ATS is yet to be empirically validated (Pont et al., 2009). And
somewhat paradoxically, the existence of cycling infrastructure
can contribute to lower rates of cycling, particularly when
these cycle paths are along the routes with high traf<U+FB01>c (Willis
et al., 2015). Thus it may be through indirect mechanisms that
changes to the built environment affect the uptake of ATS, for
instance by way of increased parental perceptions of safety.
Therefore, this could indicate that policies to promote cycling
need not only to promote a supportive urban form and disin-
centivize motorised transport modes, but also need to address,
and modify parental perceptions of active transport modes
(McMillan, 2005).
Parental perceptions of safety have a signi<U+FB01>cant role in
cycling uptake among children (Ducheyne et al., 2012).
Research with young teenagers (12–16 years) reported a strong
correlation between parental attitude and student’s mode
choice (Woldeamanuel, 2016). Moreover, there is evidence to
suggest that parental perceptions can also contribute to gender
biases in the uptake of active transport modes. Carver et al.
(2010) found that some parents discourage outdoor physical
activity for girls more so than for boys. In Australia, however,
Carver et al. (2008) found no signi<U+FB01>cant differences between
boys’ and girls’ self-perception of traf<U+FB01>c safety and ‘stranger
danger’. In Italy, on the other hand, gender in<U+FB02>uenced child-
ren’s perceptions of their own safety. For instance, girls in small
cities were more likely to communicate feelings of danger com-
pared to those from small towns (Zani et al., 2001)
The main contribution of this paper is its focus on the per-
ceptions of cycling to school by adolescents and their parents,
extending academic literatures commonly focused on primary
school children (e.g. Trapp et al., 2011; Ducheyne et al., 2012).
By incorporating parental perceptions we add additional, quali-
tative insights to the cycling to school, and active transport to
school literature. A strong parental in<U+FB02>uence on transport
mode choice for both children and adolescents has been
reported previously (Trapp et al., 2011; Ducheyne et al., 2012;
Carver, 1982). Thus by incorporating parents into this research,
we are able to provide accounts of parental perceptions of safety
among other issues, as potential barriers or enablers to the ado-
lescents’ uptake of active transport, and in particular, cycling to
school.


3. Methods

3.1 Qualitative focus groups

The research reported here forms part of an interdisciplinary,
multimethod study on transport to school behaviors in Dune-
din high schools; the Built Environment and Active Transport
to School (BEATS) study (Mandic et al., 2015b, 2016a). Focus
group sessions were designed to elicit in-depth, nuanced social
perceptions of cycling. Focus groups are particularly valuable
to this end due to their collective context. Thus the aim of the
focus group is to get the participants to interact with one
another (Ritchie, Lewis, McNaughton Nicholls, & Ormston,

344        D. HOPKINS AND S. MANDIC
2014), often with very little intervention by the researcher.
Focus groups differ from group interviews in that the group
interactions are of speci<U+FB01>c interest and these interactions are
explicitly used to generate data and new insights into a particu-
lar phenomenon (Berg and Lune, 2012), thus they are both syn-
ergistic (Stewart, Shamdasani, & Rook, 2007) and spontaneous
(Ritchie et al., 2014). Focus groups can, therefore, present a
more natural environment, more closely related to real life,
“because participants are in<U+FB02>uencing, and in<U+FB02>uenced by others”
(Krueger and Casey, 2009: p.7). Due to the highly social nature
of transport and modal choice, there is a strong tradition of
focus group use for transport research (e.g. Xenias & Whit-
marsh, 2013), and particularly in engaging with children and
adolescents (e.g. Simons et al., 2013, 2014).
3.2 Study area
Dunedin is a small, coastal city on the lower South Island
of New Zealand. It covers an area of 3,314 km2, and is
home to approximately 130,000 people, making Dunedin
New Zealand’s seventh-largest city by population, and sec-        Figure 1. Map of Dunedin’s City Center and Road Network. Source: Authors dia-
ond largest by territorial land area. The K€     oppen climate    gram from Google Maps). White lines indicate road network. Dark lines indicate
existing cycle lanes. The bold black line highlights State Highway 1 (SH1), the
classi<U+FB01>cation identi<U+FB01>es Dunedin’s climate as “Oceanic” or         way system which passes through Dunedin.
“Maritime”: a generally temperate climate, with mild sum-
mers and cool winters. Yet the highly varied topographical
3.3.1 Student focus groups
landscape of Dunedin results in a variety of “microclimates”
Students were recruited for the focus groups through their high
across Dunedin suburbs. Dunedin’s city center or Central
school, as part of the BEATS Study. Any student who completed
Business District (CBD) is inland from the Otago Harbour.
the quantitative survey and anthropometry testing was eligible to
Beyond the CBD, the city is surrounded by hills and ocean.
participate in a focus group. Inclusion criteria ensured that partici-
Much of Dunedin’s residential housing is on the hillsides
pants were high school students, and enrolled in one of the 12
(see Figure 1 for a topographical representation). This
high schools in Dunedin. While all efforts were made to ensure a
topography places speci<U+FB01>c challenges for promoting active
gender and age group balance in the focus groups, this was not
transport modes.
always possible. Student focus groups were conducted at 10
State Highway 1 (SH1), a major highway running the
schools: <U+FB01>ve co-educational schools, and <U+FB01>ve single-sex schools
length of New Zealand, passes through Dunedin on two
(three girls’ schools and two boys’ schools). The focus groups were
one-way streets with a 50-kilometer per hour (KPH)
conducted during lunch time or immediately after school on site
speed limit through the CBD, and 60 KPH outside of the
at each participating school. Students were rewarded with a book
CBD. SH1 is highlighted in Figure 1. These one-way
voucher for their time. Student focus groups were scheduled in
streets also have some of the most developed cycling
agreement with high school principals, and were performed
infrastructure. The map in Figure 1 shows cycle lanes
between June 2014 and April 2015. A total of 10 student focus
with darker lines, while roads are depicted with white
groups with 54 students were completed (Table 1).
lines. There are more cycle lanes under development in
Home address data were recorded using the online survey
the relative <U+FB02>at area of South Dunedin, as part of a pro-
and used to determine New Zealand Index of Deprivation (a
posed cycle network to connect existing cycling infra-
neighborhood area deprivation score) as a surrogate for stu-
structure and provide access to key destinations
dents’ socioeconomic status (Salmond, Crampton, King, &
(Dunedin City Council, 2012). There is also a proposal to
Waldegrave, 2006). The deprivation index was recoded from
create separated cycle lanes in order to improve cycle
the original 10-point scale (1 D least deprived to 10 D most
safety along the SH1 (NZTA, 2016).
deprived) into <U+FB01>ve categories: lowest (1–2), middle-low (3–
4), middle (5–6), middle-high (7–8) and highest (9–10) dep-
rivation score. Overall neighborhood deprivation score cate-
3.3 Participant recruitment
gories for students (available for 50 (93%) students) were
The details of recruitment for the student and parental focus     28.0% lowest deprivation, 32.0% middle-low, 12.0% middle,
groups have been described elsewhere (Mandic et al., 2016a)       16.0% middle-high, and 12.0% high deprivation. Modes of
and are brie<U+FB02>y summarized in the following section. A total of    travel to school were also self-reported by students in the
6 parental and 10 student focus groups were conducted. The        online survey (Mandic et al., 2016a). Usual transport to
sample size for student and parental focus groups was deter-      school among student focus group participants (data avail-
mined by redundancy and saturation (Eisenhardt, 1989; Lin-        able for 53 (98%) students) were 49.1% driven by others,
coln & Guba, 1985).                                               5.7% driving themselves, 5.7% school bus, 1.9% public bus,





















one-































































Table 1. Student focus group details.
Focus group code     Co-educational status of the school          Number
SFG #01                      Girls school
SFG #02                      Boys school
SFG #03                      Co-ed
SFG #04                      Girls school
SFG #05                      Boys school
SFG #06                      Co-ed
SFG #07                      Co-ed
SFG #08                      Co-ed
SFG #09                      Girls school
SFG #10                      Co-ed
SFG, student focus group; Co-ed, co-educational (mixed-gender schools)
35.8% walking and 3.8% cycling (2 students cycled to school
most/all of the time, 6 rarely, and 45 never cycled to
school). Overall, 43.4% of students used motorized transport
only, 30.2% used active transport, and 26.4% used a com-
bined motorized and active transport to school.

3.3.2 Parental focus groups
Parents of Dunedin high school students were invited to
participate in a quantitative survey and a parental focus
group as part of the BEATS Study. It was not a prerequisite
that the parental participant’s child had participated in the
student study. Parents could participate in one or both of
the research activities; 96% of focus group participants also
completed an online survey. Advertisements for participants
were posted in school newsletters and local businesses.
Focus group sessions were held in a room on the University
of Otago campus. Sessions were run between 4 pm and
8 pm in the evening, and parents were rewarded with a
book voucher for their time. A total of 6 parental focus
groups, with 25 participants, were conducted during 2014
and 2015 (Table 2). Overall neighborhood deprivation score
categories for parent participants (available for 24 (96%)
parents) were 37.5% lowest deprivation, 25.0% middle-low,
16.7% middle, 16.7% middle-high, and 4.2% high depriva-
tion. Highest education of the parent participants were
20.8% high school, 12.5% polytechnic degree, 50.0% univer-
sity degree, and 16.7% postgraduate degree. Highest educa-
tion of an adult in the household included 4.2% high
school, 4.2% polytechnic degree, 62.5% university degree,
16.7% postgraduate degree, and 12.5% other.


3.4 Focus group content

Focus groups were attended by at least two of the BEATS
research team, with the same lead researcher for all focus
groups. The lead researcher, a trained qualitative researcher,
Table 2. Parental focus group details.
Focus group code                                   Gender
PFG #01                                          3MC3F
PFG #02                                              6F
PFG #03                                          2MC2F
PFG #04                                              4F
PFG #05                                              2F
PFG #06                                          1MC2F
PFG, parental focus group; M, male, F, female.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION          345

of participant            Year groups included in session  Date of focus group
2                                       9                    13/06/2014
6                                    9,10,12                 18/09/2014
11                                 9, 10, 11, 12,             18/09/2014
5                                     9, 13                  20/10/2014
4                                       9                    17/09/2014
3                                    9,11,13                 28/10/2014
5                                     9, 13                  15/09/2014
5                                   9, 10, 13                24/10/2014
9                                       9                    20/10/2014
4                                   9, 10, 13                29/04/2015

took responsibility for running the session, providing topical
questions and prompts, and ensuring all participants were able
to contribute. Key themes for the student focus groups
included: current travel practices, motivations for current prac-
tices, barriers to alternative practices, perceptions of transport
modes, stereotypes of users of different transport modes, and
in<U+FB02>uences on travel behaviors (e.g. parents, teachers, and
peers). For parental focus groups, key themes included: current
travel patterns and social pressures, personal transport to
school experiences, perceptions of bene<U+FB01>ts of ATS, relation-
ships between travel and independence, the built environment,
and perceptions of safety.
The second researcher took detailed notes of the focus
group conversations, and was invited to ask additional
questions for clari<U+FB01>cation at the end of the session. Refresh-
ments were provided for both student and parent focus
groups, which helps to create a more relaxed environment
and to foster a positive environment in which the partici-
pants feel free to speak at ease and without judgment. Par-
ticipants were reassured that their responses would be
anonymized in any subsequent reporting of the empirical
material, as per the University of Otago Human Ethics
Board approval.


3.5 Analysis
The focus groups were digitally audio-recorded and fully tran-
scribed into text documents. These documents were then uploaded
to NVivo10 qualitative analysis software. The focus group tran-
scriptions were explored for reference to cycling. Through a pro-
cess of abstraction and interpretation, the researchers attempted to
categorize the empirical material looking across and within key

themes. An iterative coding process was adopted which allowed
the researchers to look deeper within the material for more
nuanced perceptions of cycling within the sample. Each focus
group was explored collectively by way of “whole group analysis”

Number of participants                     Date of focus group
6                                     06/10/2015
6                                     08/10/2015
4                                     16/10/2014
4                                     18/09/2014
2                                     25/11/2014
3                                     06/08/2015


346        D. HOPKINS AND S. MANDIC
(Ritchie et al., 2014), after which similarities and differences
between the focus group sessions were examined. Similarly, the
student and parental focus groups were analyzed as two distinct

bodies of information, before being drawn together to identify the
cross-group patterns and trends in perceptions of cycling. This
process allowed for themes to be identi<U+FB01>ed in one or both groups
of participants.


3.6 Limitations

This paper reports the <U+FB01>ndings of a small number of focus
groups with a nonrepresentative sample speci<U+FB01>c to the city of
Dunedin, New Zealand. The sample includes students from 10
of 12 Dunedin high schools in Dunedin; however, the <U+FB01>ndings
are illustrative of the speci<U+FB01>c context (e.g. people, time, and
place). All parental participants, and most student participants,
self-selected to participate in this research. Self-selection bias
can result in more open, patient and interested participants
than the general sample universe (Robinson, 2014). The impact
of this bias on the research <U+FB01>ndings was accounted for by the
researcher. Thus while these <U+FB01>ndings provide a depth of insight
into perceptions of cycling among parents and adolescents,
they should not be interpreted as broadly generalizable beyond
this speci<U+FB01>c sample.


4. Findings
The analysis uncovered perceptions of cycling that related to
cycling in general, and cycling to school speci<U+FB01>cally. While
focus group themes were concentrated on transport to school,
this was interwoven with other types of everyday travel, includ-
ing work (for parents) and leisure. Three key themes are used
to present the <U+FB01>ndings: 1) perceived safety, 2) implicit mes-
sages, and 3) social norms. These themes are not represented as
“drivers” and “barriers” to cycling, but as nuanced conceptuali-
zations of cycling by the research participants.


4.1 Complexities of perceived safety

Safety emerged as a key feature of focus group discussions and
was more clearly articulated by the parental focus group partic-
ipants, than by students. The interviewers did not speci<U+FB01>cally
ask about safety; however, this emerged as an important theme
relating to perceptions and uptake of cycling, and perceived
acceptability of cycling as a mode of transport for high school
students. Narratives of safety and relative safety are therefore
presented as a wider context in which transport to school deci-
sions are made. From the interviews, we found a series of sub-
themes relating to safety: perceptions of safety and a “safe
environment,” infrastructure (e.g. cycling lanes), accidents and
collisions, responsibilities for safety, and the adolescents’ cycle
skills.
While safety was widely identi<U+FB01>ed as a concern for parental
participants, it was conceptualized by some parents as a <U+FB02>uid
term, in that it could be overcome by negotiating particular
urban areas, roads and junction, and times of day. This was
particularly noticeable with parents who cycled regularly and
encouraged their children to cycle too.

Participant 1: [Safety is] in your head. It doesn’t stop me. It’s just a
bit more selective than you would like to be or be able to be less selec-
tive of the roads… It’s to not have to kind of choose certain streets or
even times to get to a cycle way or get to a footpath where I can ride
on or something like that it would be nice if there were a few more
there.
Interviewer: So what times and what areas would you avoid?
Participant 2: The one-way system, I never cycle on the one-way
system.
Participant 3: There’s still so many trucks on it ae?
Participant 2: There are parked cars on one side and traf<U+FB01>c on the
other. I try to avoid streets where I am in-between parked cars and
traf<U+FB01>c.
(Parental Focus Group #03)

Dunedin’s major one-way transport route through the city
as a part of New Zealand Highway #1 was perceived to be a par-
ticularly dangerous “site” for cycling at most times of the day.
Yet paradoxically, this road also has the most developed cycling
infrastructure. In this situation, the perceived safety associated
with available cycle lanes is replaced by perception of danger
due to the volume and speeds of other traf<U+FB01>c: “It’s really freaky
with the trucks going past you at 100 KPH… I suppose the
one-ways are the things, the areas where it seems a bit dodgy at
times” (Participant 4, Parental Focus Group #02). Thus cycle
lanes alone do not appear to be suf<U+FB01>cient to increase perceived
safety of cycling on a particular road. The cycle lanes on Dune-
din’s SH1 were built in 2001 in response to a cyclist fatality fol-
lowing a collision with a motor vehicle in 1998 (ViaStrada,
2013). However, further fatal collisions between cyclists and
motor vehicles (2005, 2011, 2012) contributed to perceptions of
Dunedin’s SH1 as “dangerous” and “unsafe” for cyclists.
Since the “safety” of cycling was not assured by infrastruc-
ture alone, another participant uses a route without cycle lanes
when traveling through the city, especially with their high-
school-aged children.
I have had a couple of near misses and I am quite reluctant for them
[participant’s children] to be on the bikes now even though I am a
pretty keen cyclist myself… [We go] straight down George Street
from North East Valley. Straight down George Street because you
know, [my wife] works in transport, she reckons that those cycle lanes
are just death traps, there has been three people killed on them over
the last few years. As she said, George Street is a lot slower. There is a
lot of double parking and people pulling in, so it’s got some of those
natural obstacles. (Participant 4, Parental Focus Group #03)

The student focus groups also highlighted the importance of
a “safe” route to school, and suggested that safety is more
important than distance to school in determining the likelihood
of uptake of cycling to school. For instance, a student with a
short journey would not cycle if that journey was on “unsafe”
roads. Thus “the types of roads that you have to bike on, that’s
a huge factor” (Participant 2, Student Focus Group #06).
In terms of places that are perceived to be particularly dan-
gerous, places with a high volume of traf<U+FB01>c were highlighted as
particularly high-risk, “I think really busy places at really busy
time of day [should be avoided by cyclists]” (Participant 1,
Parental Focus Group #03). And there was evidence of students
modifying their behavior to negotiate busy and “unsafe” roads,
with one adolescent noting that he would rather negotiate the
broken glass on the side roads than ride on the main road:


Participant 6: Some of the roads seem to have a bit of glass on them
sometimes.
Interviewer: Glass on the pavement?
Participant 6: No, on the roads where you’re riding your bike… I try
and dodge it but it’s not the best.
Interviewer: Are there particular roads where you <U+FB01>nd more glass
than others?
Participant 6: It’s sort of the off-roads rather than the main roads.
Interviewer: So do you avoid those roads?
Participant 6: I normally just go on them [the side roads] so that I
don’t get run over. Going on the main road, there are a lot more cars.
(Student Focus Group #02)

Nevertheless, the responsibility for safety appeared to be
directed to cyclists rather than other road users. For instance, a
parent participant argued that “I don’t think that cyclists
should go where there are lots of trucks. That is just kind of
asking for trouble.” (Participant 1, Parental Focus Group #03).
This puts responsibility for safety on the cyclist, rather than the
transport system or the car driver. It therefore replicates the
hegemonic discourse of a car-dominated transport system.
These comments articulate the perceived necessity for cyclists
to modify their behavior to ensure they avoid an unsafe situa-
tion. This includes not cycling on busy roads, not cycling at
peak times, and avoiding roads where trucks might be present,
even if there is cycling infrastructure on such roads.
In the absence of a bypass or alternative route, heavy goods
vehicles are required to drive through Dunedin on SH1 to reach
more southern parts of New Zealand. Cyclists using the cycle
lanes are therefore sharing the roads with large, high-speed
motorized vehicles and this was identi<U+FB01>ed as a hazard. This per-
ception related to the truck driver’s ability to account for or see

cyclists. For instance one participant stated that “I saw that

thing on TV the other night about how little they [truck driv-
ers] can see… it was scary.” (Participant 1, Parental Focus
Group #03). This therefore promotes a narrative around hege-
monic use of the transport system, which biases toward large

motorized vehicles as the dominant road users. However, while

some participants perceived it to be the responsibility of the
cyclist to avoid the truck driver, another participant noted that
truck drivers can be more considerate to cyclists than “main
street drivers.” Thus, the driving competency and willingness
of the vehicle driver to account for cyclists was identi<U+FB01>ed as a
major risk factor.
Participant 2: Truck drivers know how dangerous they are. So I <U+FB01>nd
they are often more considerate… I try and avoid streets where there
is a lot of traf<U+FB01>c because the main street drivers are just driving
around talking to the kids or listening to the radio and they are not
conscious of how dangerous they are for cyclists. They are the people
I have the most trouble with.
Interviewer: So normally there is a lot around the trucks being the
scariest or the most dangerous for cyclists but it’s actually just road
users?
Participant 1: They [truck drivers] are the best drivers, they are good
drivers. Well maybe it’s more for me, I don’t think we should demand
space everywhere, where there is critical needs move lots of stuff and
you can use trucks and you may as well put cyclists somewhere else.
(Parental Focus Group #03)
This participant therefore questioned the value and posi-
tioning of the cycle lanes along the major route through Dune-
din (Highway #1), an area that heavy vehicles were unable to
avoid.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION                    347
Student focus groups provided another example, highlight-
ing the antisocial behaviors of some drivers, which can contrib-
ute to safety concerns. For instance, while traf<U+FB01>c volumes were

identi<U+FB01>ed as a barrier to cycling, speci<U+FB01>c driver behaviors were
perceived as a greater issue for students: “Sometimes you get
the occasional driver that likes to get right behind you and toot
[their horn] to see if you fall off” (Participant 2, Student Focus
Group #02), or that “ some people don’t see [the cyclist] and

open their door [onto them]” (Participant 11, Focus Group
#03). The latter comment may indicate awareness of cyclist
injuries and fatalities which in some cases have been the result
of roadside parallel parking. The dependence of cyclists on the
behavior of car drivers to ensure their safety was highlighted as
problematic by students, “It’s kind of annoying to rely on driv-
er’s to know what they’re doing, because there are some really
bad drivers” (Participant 2, Student Focus Group #03). They
also noted that in rush-hour traf<U+FB01>c “everyone gets really
annoyed with cyclists” (Participant 6, Student Focus Group
#03), which could suggest some intolerance and wider negative
social perceptions relating to cycling and cyclists in Dunedin.
Yet despite concerns about the geographic positioning of
existing cycle lanes along streets with high volume of traf<U+FB01>c,
safety concerns for cycling also contributed to articulated per-
ceptions for greater need to invest in cycling infrastructure.
Funding disparities between infrastructure for motorized trans-
port versus cycling was highlighted as a source of frustration by
parents. Perceptions and experiences of danger when cycling in
Dunedin led some participants to emphasize the importance of
fully separated cycle lanes.

They spend enough money on the highways and stuff. Last year,

30 years of biking or something, and a car just came straight through
the intersection and smashed the whole back wheel up and sent me
<U+FB02>ying. Before that I had been so blase, you know. [But now] I can
feel how heavy this car was and it made me feel so vulnerable and
then to think that my kids are out in that sort of traf<U+FB01>c as well. It is
just like “I don’t care how much it costs or whatever just get them off

the road.” (Participant 4, Parental Focus Group #03)

This participant spoke of the need for fully separated cycle
lanes that would protect cyclists from motorized vehicles. In
contrast to the aforementioned “unsafe space” of the one-way
system, the off-road cycling lanes around Dunedin’s harbor
were reported to be a safe and attractive place to cycle, with
parents participants talking about driving to the off-road cycle
paths with their children to “practice” cycling.

Many of the bike, so called bike lanes in Dunedin are actually in my
opinion more dangerous than not having them. Kaikorai Valley is a
good example; it used to have two lanes in each direction. Now it’s
got a bike lane and a car lane in each direction, but I actually think
that cyclists would be better off taking up one of the car lanes, and
the cars would drive round the cyclists. Whereas at the moment they
are on a straight narrow bike lane maybe this wide. So any car that’s
going close, you’re going to end up under a car in the next lane. I
really wish both lanes didn’t exist, I think four lanes, because then
there’s space for car doors to be open. (Participant 6, Parental Focus
Group #01)
The parental focus groups articulated a correlation
between school students being driven to school and the road
traf<U+FB01>c volumes that contribute to a perceived “unsafe”
cycling environment. For instance, a parent stated that

348          D. HOPKINS AND S. MANDIC
“Every time a parent takes a teenagers or a child to school
because ‘there’s too much traf<U+FB01>c’, it creates more, ‘too much
traf<U+FB01>c’ and it’s possible that every time that happens it also
triggers a decision for another parent to also drive their kids
to school” (Participant 6, Parental Focus Group #01). This
was reiterated in another focus group session, where a par-
ticipant argued that “If everybody cycled instead of taking
their car, then there wouldn’t be all the cars on the road
and it [safety] wouldn’t be such an issue” (Participant 2,
Parental Focus Group #03).
Parents used personal experiences of cycling risk and danger
to explain their current perceptions of cycling for both them-
selves and their children. For instance, one participant spoke of
two collisions with motor vehicles which contributed to con-
cerns about safety of cycling, and less cycling.
I would love to cycle, but when I was a university student here I had

two [accidents], down by the Hocken [library] with the logging truck
and another one where I was knocked off by a taxi, who came
through a stop sign and hit me. So I don’t feel safe. I mean I’d love to
bike, and the only time I’ve biked after that was when I was living in
Andy Bay and I could use the cycle track around Portsmouth Drive,
and so most of the time I was completely off the road. (Participant 5,
Parental Focus Group #02)

Another participant in the same focus group identi<U+FB01>ed the
same urban area of Dunedin as being dangerous, due to the

large logging trucks. This participant stated that she “lost her
nerve” when it comes to cycling on the road, and this is mostly
due to the volume of heavy vehicles.

I love to cycle, however, whether I’ve lost my nerve or whatever I feel
it to be unsafe for me now, even though there are cycle trails around
the edge of the harbour. But I think that some of it I’d still need to be
on the road with the logging trucks which go by the Hocken [library].
That’s where I need to go and I’m just quite put off by that. (Partici-
pant 1, Parental Focus Group #02)

Learning to ride a bike was acknowledged as an important
competency for young people, “It’s a massive skill increase as
well for a child. It’s a great con<U+FB01>dence builder for them” (Par-

ticipant 1, Parental Focus Group #01). Yet while the need for

children to gain cycle skills was well-articulated, the course of
action was less clear. The use of off-road cycle lanes was pre-
ferred by most parents; however, it was acknowledged that this
contributed to delayed development of adequate on-road
cycling skills for some children.

Participant 1: The older one we’ve still got. But the younger one, she
is just not good enough, she doesn’t “get” traf<U+FB01>c either.
Participant 3: It takes them a bit to get that traf<U+FB01>c, that sense in traf-

<U+FB01>c, the speed sense and all that even with walking and crossing the
road.
Participant 1: So maybe that is a disadvantage with separated cycle
ways is that people won’t learn traf<U+FB01>c habits. The older girl did
because she was out riding all the time in traf<U+FB01>c.
(Parental Focus Group #03)

This lead some parents to delay riding a bike for their chil-
dren until they felt the children were mature enough and able

to negotiate the traf<U+FB01>c, and particularly motor vehicles on the
road: “My kid has actually been asking for a bike and she is not
very good on a bike and only just learnt to ride it and we live
on the hill. I’m just putting it off as long as I can because it’s so
dangerous. And when we get it we will probably just put on

the car and go to that path” (Participant 2, Parental Focus
Group #04).


4.2 Implicit messages
This theme emerged from the student focus groups, where it
became clear that there is evidence of subtle and implicit mes-
saging which may promote a particular culture around cycling
for Dunedin’s high school students. The way cycling is framed
by schools (either explicitly or implicitly) emerged as a poten-
tial barrier to uptake of cycling to school by Dunedin high
school students. This was articulated through two examples:
the provision of bike racks and storage, and school rules relate
to uniform requirements, particularly for female students.
From the student focus groups, it became clear that there is

generally low awareness of bicycle storage facilities at school.
Across the schools, noncyclists were often unsure of the avail-
ability or location of bike racks for their use.

Participant 3: No one bikes except…
Participant 2: Two or three people might bike.
Participant 3: But there is no bike rack. Like there is nothing.
Participant 2: Yes there is.
Participant 1: There are heaps.
Participant 2: Over by the… house.
Participant 1: I’ll show you.
Participant 3: Oh, behind it? I have never been behind it.
(Student Focus Group #05)

The positioning of cycling racks at school was also identi<U+FB01>ed
by adolescents as either being too hidden or too exposed, and

in both cases safety and security of bikes was questioned. The
dialogue below provides evidence of these diverse perspectives,
with one participant arguing that bike locks are suf<U+FB01>cient to
ensure the security of a bike at school.

Participant 3: We don’t have many bikers at all really. We’ve got a
couple our actual bike rack facilities are a bit exposed. The bike racks
are pretty visible from, from the street so I think that puts a few peo-
ple off. Just security issues and things.
Participant 6: There are simple bike locks that will <U+FB01>x it.

Participant 3: Oh yeah I mean but still, people are a little cautious of
that.
(Student Focus Group #02)

It was also suggested that ulterior motives contributed to
poor advertising of the location of the cycling facilities on the
school grounds, and therefore the option of cycling to school.
Student focus group participants argued that the rules relating


to cycling to school were unclear, and thus only keen cyclists
would cycle to school. This could be interpreted as the discour-
agement of cycling as a mode of transport to school.

Participant 4: They don’t really make the rules very clear about bikes
either, I don’t even know if there are any bike racks around here or
anything.
Participant 5: Yeah there is… I don’t think [the principal] would
really advertise it because, I don’t know, some people would say it’s a
bad look on the school like you being in your uniform, because we’re
girls, ladies who wear skirts and stuff.
(Student Focus Group #04)

Female students at both single-sex and co-ed schools fre-
quently identi<U+FB01>ed their school uniform as barrier to cycling to
school. Most female school uniforms require a knee length kilt


skirt which was viewed as incompatible with riding a bicycle.
To respond to this, high school students wanting to cycle would
need to change into their school uniform, “I know a couple of
people who bike in their sports gear and leave their uniform at
school and then they get changed when they get to school”
(Student Focus Group #04, Participant 4). When asked about
this practice, participants suggested that only the teachers’
favorite students would be allowed to change at school, and it
was widely viewed as against school rules.

Interviewer: You mentioned a couple of people you know who cycle
like on bikes to school in their gym clothes and leave their uniforms
here. Do you think there are many students in school are aware that
they are allowed to do that?
Participant 3: I’m not really sure if we’re allowed to. But they’re quite
the teacher’s pets so they’re not really [allowed to]. They get away
with things that they’re not really supposed to do. I am not sure
whether you’re allowed to or not.
(Student Focus Group #04)

This resulted in cycling being perceived as a mode that
“other people” do, rather than a socially acceptable mode of

transport. Moreover, the incompatibility of the school uniform
with cycling contributed to a perception of cycling to school as
a male rather than female activity.
Participant 7: Generally it’s the boys more than the girls [who cycle to
school] because we [girls] can’t actually ride the bikes with skirts
without having to get changed before and after.
Interview: Ok sure, are you allowed to wear other clothes if you were
going to ride a bike?
Participant 1: I don’t see why not.

Participant 6: You’re supposed to wear a full school uniform outside
of school.
Participant 7: Which makes it practically impossible to bike because
we can’t actually move our legs.
Participant 9: Unless you change into a totally different out<U+FB01>t.
Participant 7: Then you get told off when you walk into the school
and they’re like you’re not wearing a school uniform.
Interviewer: So you’d have to be in your school uniform or not school
uniform?
Participant 2: You’re not allowed in school unless you’re in your

school uniform.
Participant 7: You’re not allowed to do partial because it makes it
look bad for the school.
(Student Focus Group #03)



4.3 Socialization, individual and group norms

For high school students there appears to be a narrative of
cycling being for “other people,” and thus it was not seen to be
a socially acceptable transport option for many student focus
group participants. This was for a variety of reasons including

the topography of Dunedin. The hilly landscape made some

participants view cyclists as “sporty” people. For instance, one

student stated, “I sort of think that Dunedin is almost too hilly

for people to be able to cycle everywhere apart from the really

hard-core cyclist so I can’t really think of much else” (Partici-
pant 1, Student Focus Group #01).
There was also evidence of the common discourse around
cyclist behavior, “Once we were coming along the peninsula

and there were two bikes like up the middle. Not in the middle,
but taking up the whole lane, and they shouldn’t” (Participant
9, Student Focus Group #03). This dialogue suggests that
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION                     349
cyclists do not abide by road rules. These group norms can per-
petuate the dominance of private car travel, and reduce the like-
lihood of young people taking up cycling as a transport mode,
particularly if they do not identify with the people they perceive
to be “cyclists.”
In contrast to this, cycling for recreation was viewed differ-
ently and more favorably in many contexts. These norms could
be reducing the uptake of cycling as a transport mode, as one
parent identi<U+FB01>ed their daughter’s willingness to ride a bike rec-
reationally, but not for transport, despite family norms to the

contrary. This could suggest that for some high school students,
cycling is perceived to be nondesirable transport mode, and
therefore not used.

Participant 3: She [participant’s daughter] would not get on a bike.
She would ride a bike for recreation, but for getting from A to B? She
was like, “No way am I getting on the bicycle.”
Interviewer: Why was that?
Participant 3: I don’t know, uncool? Not the thing that she was going
to be seen doing? And it was ridiculous, we all bike. It wasn’t any-
thing that she got from us practically.
(Parental Focus Group #01)

Across both sets of participants, those who regularly cycle
tended to prioritize “time alone,” and value this attribute of
cycling. Students in particular focused on the importance of
“alone time” between home and school. For these students,
time to think while cycling was highly valued and therefore
contributed to a prioritization of cycling as a mode of transport


to school.
Interviewer: So why do you think it might be nice to have some alone
time?
Participant 2: Away from your siblings.
Participant 1: It’s sort of space between family and like school friends.
Participant 3: It’s good to have a period of time where you can just
think.
(Student Focus Group #08)



This was reiterated in another focus group, where both
walking and cycling to school were identi<U+FB01>ed as a time to tran-
sition between home and school.

Participant 3: It’s just kind of a break from, kind of the transition
between at home in the mornings things can be a little frantic organi-
zation of everything and then school and then when you actually
have to start knuckle down and get working so it’s quite nice kind of.
There is nothing else really to do, you know what I mean? You’ve
just got to walk.
Participant 6: Yeah, I know what you mean, I quite like my bike ride
and I can <U+FB01>gure out how I am going to do my homework.
(Student Focus Group #02)

This narrative of “alone time” was contrasted with discus-

sions around the importance of socializing and social activities

with peers. Socializing after school was identi<U+FB01>ed as an impor-

tant, often spontaneous activity, and for those who cycled to

school, having a bike was a limitation:

Participant 3: The bikes is a bit of a pain, it would be better if I was
able to walk if I was to go anywhere else because you have to chain
in up somewhere handy to remember it.
Interviewer: So you might not be able to go do things after school
because you have your bike?
Participant 3: Yeah it’s just another factor that I have to take into
account; it makes things faster but sort of yeah.

350          D. HOPKINS AND S. MANDIC
Interviewer: What sort of activities would you want to do, what sort
of things do you think it might?
Participant 3: Oh just I don’t know if a group of friends going into
town I could head in with them or that’s probably the main thing
just anything outside the usual routine.
Interviewer: So riding your biking into town would just be quite frus-
trating for you?
Participant 3: It’s a pain.
(Student Focus Group #08)

This was compounded by a desire to be social and walk with

friends, whereas cycling was perceived to be a solo activity:

“walking home with people and walking to school with people,

that’s more convenient than going on a bike” (Participant 4,

Student Focus Group #08). Parents also agreed that there is a

lack of <U+FB02>exibility to adapt to changing social environment, to

accept impromptu invitations, when cycling to work.

One of the negatives [about cycling] I think is that you can cycle
somewhere but if you have to come home and its inconvenient, or if
you get offered a ride, or you get a quicker option home then it is
inconvenient because you are bringing a bike. (Participant 2, Paren-
tal Focus Group #01)


The parental focus groups highlighted a change trend in the
socialization of cycling in Dunedin. Parents participants spoke
of “gangs that you would be cruising around the place with”
(Participant 1, Parental Focus Group #03), and cycling was a
key feature of this social time when they commuted to school
as adolescents.

Participant 1: We biked; it’s just what you did. Well we walked to
and then you bike to cause we were on the <U+FB02>at in South Dunedin,
just every kid did. So it wasn’t really a decision it was just how things

were.
Interviewer: So cycling was quite normal?
Participant 1: Absolutely yes. It was on the <U+FB02>at, there was bugger all
traf<U+FB01>c. Well we were on the footpath anyway and getting yelled at by
old ladies to get off and stuff. But I was, that was just what everybody
did… there was a lot more kids then though, people had bigger fami-

lies and stuff so there was a lot more, we had a lot more neighbours
who actually had kids our age.
(Parental Focus Group #03)

Thus, this socialization of cycling may have contributed to a
culture of cycling that is no longer visible in Dunedin.


5. Discussion and implications

The research presented in this paper applied focus group
research methods to examine high school students’ and paren-
tal perceptions of cycling as a mode of transport, particularly to
school. Cycling is a low-carbon, active mode, which can con-
tribute to increased physical activity, as well as reducing the
carbon intensity of the transport system. Yet the proportion of
adolescents cycling to school has been declining for some time
in many industrialized countries. While there has been a surge
of interest in cycling as a hobby, this interest has had limited
impact on cycling for transport.
The research illuminated a number of key <U+FB01>ndings:
1. Physical infrastructure (e.g. cycle lanes) does not result in
perceptions of safety alone; the geographical context and
user pro<U+FB01>le (e.g. types, volumes, and speeds of traf<U+FB01>c on
the road) are also important characteristics.

2. Safety is mediated by behaviors including avoidance of
temporally and/or spatially “dangerous” areas, and
responsibility for cyclist safety appears to be with the

individual cyclist rather than the wider transport system,
or other road users.
3. Perceptions of a “safe” route to school might be more
important than distance to school for the adoption of
cycling among high school students.
4. Social norms (e.g. “people like me don’t cycle”) and

implicit messages (e.g. poor awareness of bike racks and

school rules) might be contributing to low rates of

cycling to school.

5. Cycling is increasingly viewed as an individual transport

mode, which may be less attractive to some high school

students but equally attractive to those desiring time

alone.
Bicycle lanes were introduced on Dunedin’s SH1 in response
to a cyclist fatality (ViaStrada, 2013). Yet subsequent high-
pro<U+FB01>le fatalities and serious injuries have called to question the


success of this physical infrastructure in ensuring the safety of
cyclists. Plans to further separate the cycle lanes from motor-
ized transport have been proposed. The evidence from this
research suggests that, consistent with previous research (e.g.
Dill & Carr, 2003), building separated cycle lanes might
increase perceptions of safety for some cyclists on these roads.
This <U+FB01>nding concurs with research, which has reported that for
under-represented populations, including women and children,
a high degree of separation from motorized traf<U+FB01>c is important
for increasing rates of cycling for transportation (Garrard,


Rose, & Lo, 2008). Nevertheless, the qualitative <U+FB01>ndings suggest
that large-scale physical infrastructure developments alone are
unlikely to address safety concerns. Antisocial driver behavior,
proximity to large and/or high-speed vehicles, and traf<U+FB01>c vol-
umes also need to be considered. In Dunedin, the existing on-


road cycling lanes which have been built along Dunedin’s SH1
were viewed as particularly unsafe, especially during busy times
which includes travel to school times. Thus, it was argued that
the con<U+FB01>guration of cycling lanes in Dunedin makes them inef-
fective and dangerous, especially for high school students.
When investing in cycling infrastructure, the wider context
needs to be considered. For instance, for some, less con<U+FB01>dent
cyclists, quieter routes that are not used by large or high-speed
motor vehicles, or routes with lower volumes of traf<U+FB01>c might be

a preferred option for less con<U+FB01>dent and younger cyclists, even
if those routes are less direct.
A complex range of factors appear to contribute to percep-
tions of cycling safety, including features of the built environ-
ment, perceptions of the built environment, traf<U+FB01>c safety
(including behaviors of other road users), previous cycling
experiences (including accidents), and adolescents’ cycling
skills and on-road experiences. School program designed to
increase ATS include bicycle storage, physical education and
health curriculum that promotes ATS, adaptation of the physi-
cal environment in close proximity to the school, and school
policies to promote ATS (M€oser & Bamberg, 2008; Salmon
et al., 2007). Our <U+FB01>ndings suggest that addressing parental
safety concerns should also be a key element of any cycling pro-
motion interventions, and this might also incorporate cycle
skills training to assist high school students in gaining the


required competencies for on-road cycling (Mandic et al.,
2016b). In this research, we did not assess the degree to which
parents in<U+FB02>uenced how their children get to their school. Yet
since children and adolescents are embedded in their family
context (Ghekiere et al., 2016), their decision to cycle is likely
to be strongly determined by parental perceptions of cycling.
This research provides evidence of parental safety concerns.
Research with primary school students found a strong positive
correlation between parental perceptions of safety and the
uptake of active transport (Weir, Etelson, & Brand, 2006;
Henne et al., 2014). This research qualitatively suggests a simi-
lar pattern for high school students in terms of cycling to
school. Further quantitative analysis is required to con<U+FB01>rm this.
Perceived safety is an important but <U+FB02>uid term that needs
further attention. Research in New Zealand has shown that
cycling is perceived by high school students to be less safe
than walking (Mandic et al., 2016c). In the present research,
we found evidence of cyclists responding to risk and safety
concerns by adapting their route and cycling on secondary
roads which often lacked cycling infrastructure and pre-
sented alternative hazards (e.g. broken glass on the roads).
Yet this was perceived to be a safer cycling experience than
using the established cycling networks. Research on per-
ceived versus observed risk has shown that public percep-
tions of route safety do not always re<U+FB02>ect the evidence
(Winters et al., 2012), and therefore more attention should
be paid to the routes adopted by cyclists. Responsibility for
safety was often articulated to be the responsibility of the
individual cyclist, rather than the system of transportation or
other road users. This framing of safety and responsibility is
aligned with the dominant system of transport, and the hege-

mony of car-based travel. This includes narratives of roads
being “for” cars, rather than bicycles, and therefore cyclists
need to behave as a “guest” on the transport network. High
school students appeared to be replicating these values,
highlighting situations where cyclists were “taking up the
whole lane,” and frustrating motor vehicle drivers.
Research with primary school children has previously sug-
gested that “socializing” cycling (i.e. encouraging children to
cycle with friends) could increase the rates of cycling (Hume,
Salmon, & Ball, 2007; Hume et al., 2009; Mandic et al., 2015a).
Our <U+FB01>ndings not only support this, but also provide evidence
that for high school students, solitude (i.e. “time alone”) is a
key attraction to cycling, which could be overlooked by inter-
ventions to increase socializability of cycling. Therefore, more
research speci<U+FB01>cally focused on high school students is critical
in order to acknowledge the differences in perceptions of
cycling through childhood and adolescence, and the nuanced
perceptions of socialization and solitude as attractive features
of participating in active transport to school. Understanding
the heterogeneous range of motivations, across gender and age,
will be an important part of future research.
We also found important implicit school norms associated
with cycling-related infrastructure on school grounds and
school uniforms that perpetuate a culture of not cycling. The
perceptions of incompatibility between the school uniform and

cycling to school appears to be coupled with perceptions of
cycling as a rigorous activity or “sport” that therefore requires
“sport” clothing, which may differ from the norms, values, and
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION      351
practices of high-cycling countries. The types of bicycles used
by students and within the wider society may also contribute to
this perception, with mountain bikes and road bikes more com-
mon than “city bikes” in Dunedin. Moreover, students
appeared to be largely unaware over whether they could cycle
to school in sports clothes and change at school. Many students
also appeared unsure about the availability of cycling racks.
This could perpetuate a culture that prioritizes other modes,
and not cycling.
The <U+FB01>ndings reported in this paper parallel with those found
with other population groups including younger school stu-
dents (e.g. Benson & Scriven, 2012; Ghekiere et al., 2015), and
commuters (e.g. Whannell, Whannell, & White, 2012), and in a
range of geographic contexts (e.g. Chataway, Kaplan, Nielsen,
& Prato, 2014). This therefore suggests widespread normaliza-
tion of discourses of cycling safety and cycling practice that
pervade transportation norms and values, and in<U+FB02>uence the
uptake of cycling to school. Literatures on the promotion of
utility cycling highlight the importance of distance, infrastruc-
ture, access to bicycles and related items (e.g. helmets and
locks), and cost of the uptake of cycling, and stress the research
gaps related to the roles of individual factors and the social
environment (see: Handy, van Wee, & Kroesen, 2014 for a
review). In light of the similarities between the current <U+FB01>ndings,
and those of other studies, we reiterate the need for policy and
practical interventions that address the built environment as
well as the barriers sustained by the dominance of car-based
travel and the subjugation of active transport modes, including
cycling.


6. Conclusions

Adolescents are an under researched but a vitally important
research group. The mobility experiences and expectations
adopted at this age are likely to continue through to adulthood;
thus, forming normative behaviors and habits including the
adoption of active transport modes could have both health and
environmentally bene<U+FB01>cial outcomes. Moreover, a research
focus on children and younger adolescents has resulted in
assumptions about high school students without accounting for
large differences in mobility aspirations and behaviors. Parental
concerns of the safety of cycling may be contributing to
decreased rates of cycling to school, and are interwoven with a
range of individual and social norms prioritizing car-based
travel. Nevertheless, as highlighted in this paper, mass adoption
of car based travel also contributes to lower perceived safety for
cyclists due to higher volumes of traf<U+FB01>c. Large-scale physical
infrastructure developments alone are unlikely to increase per-
ceptions of safety; driver behavior, proximity to traf<U+FB01>c, volumes
of traf<U+FB01>c, and speeds of traf<U+FB01>c also demand critical attention.
Overcoming safety concerns and negative perceptions of
cycling through behavioral and cultural interventions coupled
with upskilling and thoughtful infrastructure might present a
pathway to increase the rates of cycling.


Acknowledgment

This research was conducted whilst Debbie Hopkins was work-
ing at the Centre for Sustainability, University of Otago on
