

Barriers to Teenage Mobility
in the Greater Toronto Area,
Ontario, Canada
Attitudes, Concerns, and Policy Implications

Reihane Marzoughi

Conventional approaches to the management of transportation demand
have had limited success in reducing automobile dependency. As a result,
it has become increasingly important to understand the decision-making
processes involved in determining travel behavior. To develop a more com-
plete picture of travel behavior, research should consider diverse groups
of travelers with various mobility abilities and needs. Research on urban
form and travel behavior was extended beyond adult travel by examining
teen travelers of 13 to 19 years of age in the greater Toronto area, Ontario,
Canada. The issue was probed through the collection of quantitative and
qualitative travel data from first-year students at the University of
Toronto. The survey explored attitudes toward different modes in relation
to the locational attributes of the respondent’s hometown neighborhood.
The narratives of the survey participants illustrate that the final travel
choice is determined by the presence of supportive infrastructure that not
only facilitates active mode choices but also shapes the perceptions and
attitudes that teens form as a result of daily travel experiences. Findings
underscore the importance of providing genuine choices that meet the
needs of teens and other travelers with limited mobility.


It is widely recognized that the current approach toward transporta-
tion and land use planning is socially, economically, and environmen-
tally unsustainable. There is a large body of literature examining the
role of built form in shaping and influence travel behavior; however,
most of this research focuses on the average traveler, that is, adults
with standard work schedules. There is a need for further research that

examines the ways in which different groups of travelers negotiate

their urban environment. Commuting adults are but just one group of

travelers within any given metropolitan area. Cities are filled with

people who do not work regular hours, who may have income con-

straints, and who may be too old, or not old enough, to access certain

modes. Studying groups with limited mobility enriches the literature

on urban travel by helping shed light on some of the barriers faced by

a wider demographic of travelers.

There is a limited body of research exploring the specific trans-

portation needs of teens, and a larger body of research focused on

child travel in general. Within the teen literature, a lack of access to

independent means of travel has been identified, causing teens to rely


Department of Civil Engineering, University of Toronto, 35 Saint George Street,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A4, Canada. rei.marzoughi@utoronto.ca.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 2231, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,

D.C., 2011, pp. 61–67.
DOI: 10.3141/2231-08









on adults for much of their travel. In general, North American youth
travel is dominated by automobiles, with nearly 75% of trips being
made in private vehicles (1). This focus on the automobile has nega-
tive health (2, 3) and environmental implications (4), while also strain-
ing the schedules of caregivers. Children have often been included as
a variable in transportation studies to determine the extent of their
influence and constraint on the scheduling of activities and trips (5, 6).
The findings also have equity implications; North American chil-
dren are five times more likely to travel with their mothers as with
their fathers (1). Several other studies have shown that women bear
most of the responsibility for chauffeuring children and make more
trips to serve passengers than do men (7–9). Once youth reach driving
age, their behavior dramatically favors the automobile, with 40% of
U.S. teens of 16 to 18 years of age reporting to be the primary driver
of a household vehicle (10). Studies suggest that teens in sprawling
counties were more than twice as likely to drive more than 20 mi/day
than do teens in compact counties, a trend most prominent among
the youngest drivers (11, 12). Research conducted in various commu-
nities in the United States shows that teens gain greater independence
as they age; however, this independence comes with a greater reliance
on the automobile. Younger teens use a wider variety of transportation
modes (13). By late adolescence, the automobile is a well-established
part of the lives of U.S. teens. Relatively little is known about the
degree of automobile dependence among teenagers in the Canadian
context. Examining this group may enable researchers and practition-

ers to obtain a more nuanced picture of North American teen travel

behavior.

Recently, attention has been placed on the trip to school, focusing

on the shift from children walking to school to being predominantly

driven there by a parent (14–20). The body of literature on discre-

tionary teen travel is relatively smaller. Tal and Handy examined chil-

dren’s biking for nonschool purposes, specifically exploring the

factors associated with biking to Saturday morning youth soccer

games in Davis, California (21). The findings showed that more than

three-quarters of players and their parents drove to the game, with

fewer than 20% biking. Although this study focuses on a specific

case, it points to the need for more research exploring the influence

of physical, attitudinal, and logistical factors on a child’s mode choice.
Building on the previously mentioned literature, this paper exam-
ined the travel behavior of teenagers in the greater Toronto area
(GTA), Ontario, Canada, particularly the ways in which they meet
their discretionary travel needs. There is a focus on the ability for


teens to travel independently, and the factors that ultimately influ-
ence their mode choice. A goal of this work was to shed light on
the ways in which this age group negotiates the barriers to their

61

62


travel and whether these are related to built form, parental influ-
ences, or social attitudes. This work attempts to determine the role
these various factors play, individually or in combination, in deter-
mining travel outcomes. The work does not attempt to quantify the
relative influence of various aspects of built form on teen mode and
route choice and is mostly a qualitative and descriptive exploration of
the ways in which teens use their built environment and the reasons
behind their choices.


RESEARCH METHODS

Because there are no large-scale data sets that focus on teenagers in
the GTA, the work required the collection of new data. To do this, an
online teen travel survey was developed and distributed to first-year
university students at the University of Toronto. This survey asked
participants to reflect on their travel experiences throughout their high
school years. Questions focused on gathering specific information
regarding where each respondent went to high school, the modes used
for various discretionary trips, the degree of independent travel under-
taken, and mobility barriers identified by respondents. The analysis
expanded the understanding of the kinds of discretionary trips GTA
teens make, as well as the ways in which Toronto teens differ from
the rest of the region.


Study Area

The GTA consists of two single-tier municipalities (in which there
is only one level of municipal government: Hamilton and Toronto)
and four regional or upper-tiered municipalities (similar to and at

the same government level as a county but generally providing more
services: Durham, Halton, Peel, and York). Downtown Toronto and
its inner suburbs are served by the Toronto Transit Commission,

which provides a grid network of surface routes (buses and streetcars)

that feed into a radial subway system. The rest of the GTA is served

by buses with varying levels of frequency and reliability. These

bus lines are poorly integrated, making travel across different

municipalities challenging and costly.

In general, neighborhoods in the downtown Toronto core exhibit

a mixture of uses and sufficient density to support transit. The rest of

the GTA exhibits typical suburban characteristics, such as separated

land uses, large arterial roads with minimal pedestrian amenities, and

larger distances between origins and destinations.



Survey Sample

The survey was e-mailed to all first-year engineering students at
the University of Toronto in September 2009 (n = 1,208). Univer-
sity students, particularly first-year engineering students, may
represent individuals with particular educational backgrounds,
family traits, and so forth. Although the resulting data appear to
represent a variety of backgrounds and experiences, there is likely

some sampling bias at play. Demographic data for first-year engi-
neering students were not available for use in this study, and thus
sampling error was not assessed. A total of 481 surveys was collected,
representing a response rate of 40%. Of these responses, 417 were
complete and 64 were discarded, making the useful response rate
35%. The sample is not a perfect representation of the total teen
population in the GTA. Nevertheless, it is possible to draw some
externally valid conclusions on the basis of the selected sample.
Transportation Research Record 2231


ANALYSIS OF RESPONDENTS

There were a total of 417 useful responses, with 57% male respondents
and 43% female respondents. Of these responses, 62% (n = 257) were
from students who grew up in the GTA, with 56% of them being
male and 44% being female. Within the GTA group, 49% lived in
the City of Toronto (n =125). This group was asked to estimate the
distance between their home and the Toronto central business dis-
trict in kilometers. Approximately 36% of respondents lived within
5 km of the downtown core, whereas 44% lived more than 10 km
from downtown.
Students were asked to indicate whether they had their driver’s
license, and if so, how old they were when they got it. Results indi-
cated that 56% of the sample had their license, but only 16% of that
group grew up in Toronto. Looking at the Toronto sample, 32% had
their license, whereas 80% of the GTA (not including Toronto) had
their license. This result was consistent with data from the 2006
Transportation Tomorrow Survey (22), which showed that approxi-
mately 38% of Toronto teens between the ages of 16 and 19 had their
license, in contrast to approximately 54% to 60% for most other
GTA regions. Table 1 shows a breakdown of when each respondent
obtained his or her license.
The data show that Toronto respondents tend to get their license
later than the rest of the GTA. Whereas 90.5% of the GTA respon-
dents with a license obtained it by the time they were 17 years old,
this percentage was only 47.5% for the Toronto respondents. Further-
more, 12.5% of the licensed Toronto respondents obtained their
license after graduating from high school.



TRIP TO SCHOOL

Table 2 summarizes the modes used most commonly by respondents

for their trips to and from high school. The results echo Transportation

Tomorrow Survey findings: The dominant overall mode for school

transportation in the GTA is walking, followed by auto passenger and

transit. Looking more closely at Toronto versus the rest of the GTA,

walking and transit dominate over other modes, followed by auto pas-

senger (with a parent driver) and cycling. In fact, 49% of Toronto

respondents reported that they either walked or biked to school.

Cycling also appears to have a significant mode share within this

sample. The GTA mode shares (excluding Toronto) are slightly dif-

ferent. School bus travel plays a role in the trip to and from high

school for the GTA respondents, whereas none of the Toronto
respondents mentioned using this mode. This is because in the city
of Toronto, when a child attending middle school (grades 6 to 8) or

high school (grades 9 to 12) lives more than 4.8 km from their
school, they can request to receive transit tickets from the school


TABLE 1 Age at Which Respondents
Obtained Their License

Toronto,        GTA,
Age Obtained       n = 125 (%)     n = 132 (%)

16                    30.0            50.5
17                    17.5            40.0
18                    40               9.5
19                     7.5             0
>19                    5.0              0


Marzoughi


TABLE 2      Modes Most Commonly Used for Trips to

Number of             Walk         Bike        Driv
Respondents           (%)          (%)         (%)

Toronto, 125          36.8         12.0
GTA, 132              26.7          4.8
Total, 257            31.4          8.1




board. This policy could explain why the Toronto respondent tran-
sit mode share is 23.2% higher than that of the GTA. The GTA
respondents walk mode share is almost equal to the auto passenger
mode share. However, approximately 42% of the GTA respondents
reported using the automobile to get to school versus 18.4% of
Toronto respondents. The GTA respondents were also more likely
to be driven to and from school by a friend than were the Toronto
respondents. This finding is not surprising given that the Toronto
respondents had a smaller portion of licensed drivers.


DISCRETIONARY TRAVEL

Respondents were asked to rank the modes used most frequently for
discretionary travel during the first and second half of high school (see
Tables 3 and 4). Results indicated that as teens age, their walk trips
decrease and are replaced by either car or transit trips. Looking at just
Toronto respondents, transit dominates, but only slightly, over walk-

ing and auto passenger mode for the younger group. However, for the

older group, auto passenger mode becomes much less important. The

GTA respondents have a stronger tendency to use cars, but they also

have a larger cycling mode share than Toronto respondents do. For

older GTA teens, the “driven by adult” mode share decreases whereas

the “driven by friend” mode share increases, suggesting higher levels

of independent travel. In addition, auto driver becomes a very impor-

tant mode for this group. Once they get their license, teens are highly

motivated to obtain vehicle access to make independent driver trips.

In light of research detailing the safety risks associated with teen

driving, this result is somewhat worrisome (23).



TABLE 3 Discretionary Modes Most Frequently Used When

Respondents Were Between 13 and 15 Years of Age

Number of        Walk      Bike       Driven by        Driven by
Respondents      (%)       (%)        Adult (%)        Friend (%)

Toronto, 125     28.0      10.3            27.4               2.9

GTA, 132         13.2      13.7            53.7               3.5
Total, 257       19.7      12.2            42.3               3.2


TABLE 4 Discretionary Modes Most Frequently Used When
Respondents Were Between 16 and 19 Years of Age

Driven by
Number of      Walk     Bike      Driven by       Friend          Transit

Respondents    (%)      (%)       Adult (%)       (%)             (%)

Toronto, 125    22.2     9.4        19.2             6.9            36.5
GTA, 132        10.3    10.3        26.1             7.3            18.4
Total, 257      15.8     9.8        22.9             7.1            26.8
63


and from School

e             Driven by      Driven by             Transit       School Bus
Parent (%)     Friend (%)            (%)           (%)

3.2             13.6               1.6              32.8               0.0
9.6             26.0               6.8               9.6              16.4
6.6             20.3               4.4              20.3               8.9




To get a sense of how important the automobile is for discretionary
travel, respondents were asked to indicate the frequency with which
they require a vehicle to make such trips. The idea was to assess how
bound respondents are to automobile travel and to cross-check their
response with some of the built form characteristics of the neigh-
borhood they grew up in (e.g., sidewalk characteristics, distance to
amenities, street layout, level of activity on the streets at different
times of day).
Looking at Table 5, approximately 59% of respondents indicated
needing an automobile for almost all their discretionary trips. This
figure decreases when looking at just Toronto respondents but
increases by 20% for the rest of the GTA. Of those who indicated
needing a car for almost all their trips, 68% also indicated that their
neighborhood was poorly served by transit, and approximately 70%
indicated living in single-family homes in areas with mostly curvi-
linear street patterns. These factors suggest that those respondents
relying on automobile trips likely reside in dispersed, suburban

areas lacking adequate transit.

Another goal of the survey was to gain a better sense of how mode

use may change depending on whom the respondent is traveling with

and where they are going. Thus, respondents were asked to indicate the

modes they use for specific trips. Respondents were more likely to take

transit when shopping with friends than with parents. This finding is

particularly true for the Toronto group. Thus, it can be assumed that

parental involvement in discretionary trip making has an impact on

mode choice. Very few respondents living outside of Toronto took any

mode other than the automobile when traveling with their parents

to shop. In fact, 90% of the 13-to-15-year-old group and 75% of the

16-to-19-year-old group said they would get a ride with their parents.
Even when traveling alone, most GTA respondents within the 16-to-
19-year-old group drive to their discretionary destinations. By contrast,

driver mode shares were relatively low for the Toronto group.

For Toronto respondents, transit emerges as an important mode for
Transit            both age groups. Although auto passengers represent a significant
(%)                mode share, transit tends to dominate, particularly for the older group
and for trips made without parental accompaniment. Walk mode
31.4
shares were slightly higher for the Toronto group than for the rest of
15.9          the GTA; however, this mode is not as significant for discretionary
22.6          trips as it was for school trips.



TABLE 5 Frequency with Which Respondents Require a Vehicle
for Discretionary Travel
Drive
Self          Number of                              Less Than         About          Almost All
1                 1
(%)           Respondents          Rarely (%)        /2 Trips (%)      /2 Trips (%)   Trips (%)

5.9          Toronto, 125            26.4               16.8              18.4          38.4
27.8          GTA, 132                 4.5                5.3              11.4          78.8
17.6          Total, 257              15.6               10.9              14.8          58.8

64


PARENTAL INFLUENCE

To further probe the issue of parental influence on mode choice and
independent travel, respondents were asked a series of questions
regarding parental input on mode choice and safety. To begin with,
students were asked whether their parents allowed them to travel
alone after dark once they turned 16 (see Table 6). The majority of
respondents (75%) said that they were allowed to travel alone after
dark. Looking at the gender breakdown, it was found that of those
not allowed out after dark, 80% of the total, 74% of Toronto and
88% of GTA respondents, were female. Toronto had a higher per-
centage of respondents who were not allowed to travel alone after
dark. This could be because of the different perceptions of safety
associated with suburban and urban areas.
Respondents were also asked to comment on whether their parents
encouraged or discouraged them to take transit on their own. Many
indicated that their parents encouraged them to take transit indepen-
dently. This percentage was higher for Toronto respondents (58%)
than for GTA respondents (42%). Of those discouraged from taking
transit alone, 72% were female respondents (56% of Toronto group
and 81% of GTA group). Respondents who were discouraged from
using transit on their own were asked to comment on possible reasons
behind this sentiment. Approximately 80% said that their parents felt
riding transit was unsafe, 51% felt transit is too expensive, 27% were
afraid their child would get lost, and 22% discouraged transit use in
favor of their child using active modes such as walking and biking.
Finally, respondents were asked to comment on how their parents
felt about them walking around their city alone. In this case, 56% of
total respondents indicated that their parents encouraged them to
walk to their destinations without adult accompaniment, 19% were
discouraged, and 25% felt that their parents did not express an opin-
ion. The percentage of encouraging parents was slightly higher for
the Toronto respondents (58%) and lower for the GTA respondents
(49%). In total, 19% of respondents indicated that they were dis-
couraged from walking alone (27% of GTA respondents and 18%
of Toronto respondents). Of this group, 44% of respondents were
female (37% for Toronto group and 54% for GTA group). Again,
respondents were asked to comment on why they thought their par-
ents discouraged them from walking alone to their destinations.
Approximately 80% said that their parents felt it would be unsafe,
and 62% said that their parents worried about them getting lost.
Several respondents commented that their parents felt that walking
would be too time-consuming because of the distance between their
home and their discretionary destinations.


ATTITUDES, PERCEPTIONS, AND CONCERNS

The last part of the survey was designed to gather information regard-
ing the attitudes and perceptions teenagers have toward taking
transit, walking, and biking. Participants were also asked to identify


TABLE 6 Attitude of Parents Toward Child Traveling Alone
After Dark

Number of      Encouraged     Discouraged     Expressed
Respondents    (%)            (%)             No Opinion (%)

Toronto, 125       71             23                 6
GTA, 132           79             17                 4
Total, 257         75             20                 5


Transportation Research Record 2231


barriers to their independent travel. This section used multiple choice
questions, as well as open-ended questions. Participants were given
the opportunity to elaborate on their multiple choice answers or to
choose “other” and provide their own explanations. The analysis of
the Transportation Tomorrow Survey showed that discretionary tran-
sit mode shares have been decreasing over the past decade for this age
group. In of light this finding, most questions in this section focused
on transit to determine possible reasons for this decrease.


Transit Concerns

Participants were asked to rate the transit system in the city where they
went to high school. Overall, 36% of respondents felt that the transit
system was good, whereas 38% felt it was fair. Looking at Toronto
respondents, 64% felt that the transit system was either very good or
good, compared with 36% of the GTA respondents. The more posi-
tive perception of transit held by Toronto respondents is likely a result
of superior transit accessibility and supply in the Toronto core.
To further probe the reasons behind varying attitudes toward tran-
sit, participants were asked whether they had ever had a particularly
unpleasant experience on transit and to indicate the nature of this
experience. Approximately 53% of respondents reported having had
an unpleasant experience on public transit (n = 136). Of this group,
38% said they had to deal with a long wait or delayed bus or subway
service, 23% said they were treated unkindly by an employee, 18%
said they got lost in the transit system, 18% said they were treated
unkindly by another passenger, and 4% said they were assaulted.


Barriers to Transit Use

Participants were also asked to consider a list of possible transit barri-
ers and to rank them in terms of their importance. The most highly
rated concern was infrequent service, followed by expensive fares,
lengthy trips, and irregular service. Approximately 51% of participants
mentioned that transit service is too infrequent and impeded their
ability to use this mode. Only 35% of these respondents grew up in
Toronto, the rest grew up in other GTA areas, with more dispersed
development patterns. Respondents commented that infrequent service
is particularly an issue during nonpeak travel times. Teenagers often
travel outside of peak times and, as a result, run into service problems.
Similarly, 79% of respondents ranked the long length of transit trips
as being a major concern; approximately 37% of this group grew up
in Toronto. Respondents mentioned that long transit trips are often a
result of multiple transfers. Others mentioned long wait times for
buses and streetcars, again, particularly during off-peak times.
In terms of service irregularities, Toronto respondents made up 71%
of those who ranked this concern highly. An explanation could be
that suburban regions have less extensive transit systems with a lower
chance of being thrown off schedule because of traffic congestion
and other complications. Furthermore, infrequent service in suburban
regions leads to less spontaneous trip making and a reliance on sched-
ules, whereas in Toronto, travelers assume frequent service. It is pos-
sible that these expectations lead to more irritation when unexpected
delays occur.
Participants were also given the opportunity to comment on addi-

tional barriers not provided in the list. They were particularly vocal
with regard to funding issues, fare hikes, and lack of new infra-
structure. Some complained that there has not been enough subway

expansion in the GTA. They feel that the cost of transit in the GTA
does not reflect the level of service throughout the region, particularly

Marzoughi


outside of the downtown core. These concerns are not specific to this
age group, but clearly, teens have an opinion on the level of transit
service they are getting.
Participants also had a lot to say about transit accessibility, or lack
thereof, in the suburbs. Many mentioned lack of service in neigh-
borhoods outside of the downtown core to be a serious barrier to
their independent mobility. They felt that bus stops in the suburbs
are “poorly placed” and that the distances they have to walk to get
to a transit stop are unacceptable. Some participants felt that poor
land use planning and lack of population density were the culprits:
“Good public transit depends on population density, the denser the
population the better the public transit. There are not enough people
using transit in the suburbs, which means there is not enough reason
to increase the number of bus routes.”
Another barrier is the lack of coordination between regional transit
agencies and the Toronto Transit Commission. A few participants
mentioned having trouble using transit because they found trip plan-
ning from their neighborhood to a downtown neighborhood to be con-
fusing. They felt that transit agencies were not doing enough to make

this process easier, and as a result, some suburban teens abandoned

the idea of taking transit altogether.

A major concern for transit users is that fact that most buses and

streetcars share the road with cars, and as such, get stuck in traffic

during the peak hour. This slows down their transit trips, particularly

in the downtown core and during the summer when there is con-

struction on many routes. Overcrowding on buses and subways dur-

ing the peak hour is another barrier, mentioned primarily by those
who lived in the Toronto area.
Safety is another concern. Several participants said they felt unsafe

waiting at bus stops, especially if the area is not well lit. Waiting can
also be a problem in cold weather or if it is raining and there is no bus
shelter at the stop. A few people mentioned feeling unsafe on transit,
but this was not a common complaint.


Barriers to Walking

The most commonly cited barrier to walking was the distance between
origins and destinations within neighborhoods. Many respondents said
that walking simply takes too long and is not a convenient, viable mode
of transportation. They would rather get a ride, sacrificing some of their
freedom to travel independently, than have to walk long distances.
Several respondents expressed “feeling stuck” because of this bar-
rier. When walking distances are long, weather becomes a more
pronounced barrier (24).
Another built form barrier is the lack of pedestrian infrastructure
in certain areas. Participants mentioned that it is unpleasant walking
in areas that do not have trees or in areas that lack sidewalks. One
respondent complained that in her town (a suburb of Toronto) there
are “no good bike paths or walkways; travel destinations are too far
apart (>10 km); sidewalks disappear, forcing [a] pedestrian to walk
on [a] major road.”
They do not like having to cross “large, busy intersections” or
highway ramps because they find them dangerous. Some of these
intersections have “poorly timed traffic lights that favor drivers over
pedestrians.” Many participants mentioned that within suburban
areas, there are careless, distracted drivers who do not expect to see
pedestrians: “Drivers tend to neglect to signal and have very little
regard for cyclists and pedestrians” (female, GTA).
Respondents also mentioned feeling unsafe walking at night in
certain areas of the city because of the presence of strangers. One
65


participant mentioned living in a housing project and not feeling safe
traveling around it at night because of the presence of “dangerous
people.” A few participants mentioned that poorly placed fences and
blocked off areas are a barrier, resulting in having to take alternative,
lengthier routes. Several participants also mentioned that empty
streets with a lack of activity made them feel more vulnerable.


Barriers to Biking

Finally, participants were asked to identify barriers to utilitarian
cycling. Almost all participants identified a lack of bike lanes and
other cycling infrastructure as a barrier to cycling in the GTA. Shar-
ing the road with cars, trucks, buses, and streetcars was a serious
safety concern for this group. This problem was made worse when
construction projects took place on already crowded, narrow roads.
Another issue affecting Toronto cyclists is the presence of street-
car tracks, which can be hazardous to bikes. Thinner bike tires can
get caught in the tracks, causing the cyclist to be thrown. Partici-
pants noted that only experienced cyclists can cope against these

obstacles.

Another barrier identified by participants related to finding good

information on bike routes in the GTA. A few respondents mentioned

that they were unfamiliar with bike routes and could use some infor-

mation on the best ways of getting around the region by bike. They

felt that information on this topic is not readily available to people in

their age group.



CONCLUSIONS

The analysis of the online travel survey yielded some interesting
results regarding teenage mobility in the GTA. In general, it appears
that respondents were able to articulate the reasons behind choosing
or not choosing certain modes and indicated a certain awareness of
the role land use and transportation planning play in facilitating or
impeding their travel. Many of the concerns expressed by the par-
ticipants can directly inform policy that would benefit not only this
age group but all GTA travelers as a whole.


Implications for Policy

Two general types of policy could help teens in the GTA meet its
independent travel needs, and both involve making car-free travel
more feasible: (a) policies that make improvements to public transit,
and (b) policies that make active travel easier and safer.


Improving Public Transit

Transit is a very important mode for teenagers; however, shortcom-
ings in the level of service could push them to seek alternative
modes. To retain this demographic, it is necessary to improve the
level of service provided by transit. Findings suggest that teens who
rely mostly on cars for their discretionary travel likely reside in more
dispersed, suburban areas lacking in adequate transit. Increasing the
frequency of service along suburban routes and extending service
hours, at least on weekends, would help this group of travelers. Sig-
nificantly increased service in all suburban areas would not be eco-
nomically viable as a result of low density planning. However, in
certain cases, it would help to simply add service on routes that

66


currently do not run at all on weekends. Extending weekend service
hours could also help reduce drunk-driving incidences among teens.
Increased service on the Toronto Transit Commission network would
also help alleviate issues of overcrowding on subways, buses, and
streetcars during peak periods.
As with any large region containing several smaller munici-
palities, improved coordination between the various transit systems
across the GTA would help suburban teens a great deal. Participants
identified the need for better information regarding how to use var-
ious systems in combination and felt that the current situation is
confusing and difficult to navigate.
Improvements to service reliability would also be particularly
helpful for the innercity travelers. This can be done in a number
of ways. One way suggested by participants of this study is to
have more buses and streetcars in designated (right-of-way) lanes
to prevent them from competing with car and truck traffic. Other
ways include using Global Positioning Systems on buses and
streetcars to exercise more control on timing and avoid situations
in which there are three vehicles in a row heading west, and zero
heading east. Obviously, this type of control is made easier when
buses and streetcars are not stuck in the same peak hour traffic as
cars and trucks.


Improving Active Travel Options

Walking Improving the pedestrian experience is a very important
part of facilitating independent teen mobility. The most com-
monly cited barrier is the distance between origins and destina-
tions within many GTA neighborhoods. Although this is not as
much of a problem downtown, it makes walking in the suburbs very
difficult. Increasing the density of destinations in the suburbs will help

alleviate this problem.
Pedestrian infrastructure, particularly outside of the downtown
core, also needs some improvement. Participants described various
infrastructure issues that make walking difficult, uncomfortable, or

dangerous. Destination density would help in this case as well because
teens tend to feel safer in areas that are well populated. The more
active storefronts and streets are, the more people will be around, and
thus, the safer travelers will feel. Traffic calming measures such as

narrowed streets could also make walkers feel safer by forcing cars to

drive more slowly. Teens do not enjoy walking on long, busy, arteri-
als that are difficult to cross and filled with fast-moving cars. Sub-
urban streets with no sidewalks are another problem that can be
rectified by changing the design approach.


Biking Cyclists in the GTA have been fighting for years to improve
biking conditions, infrastructure, and safety. The policy implica-
tions of this work fall in line with those from other studies (25–27 ).

In short, there are not enough bike lanes in the GTA, making
cycling very dangerous. Participants were clear that without bike
lanes, especially ones that are separated from traffic, cyclists run
the risk of being hit by cars, trucks, or buses; being hit by people
opening their car doors; and getting their wheels stuck in streetcar

tracks.
Another way to improve cycling for teens is to provide better
information on cycling safety and best practices. Maps showing bike
paths and safe bike routes throughout the city could be distributed

through high school offices. This would go a long way in improv-
ing the confidences of teen cyclists and perhaps encouraging them
to use this mode more often.
Transportation Research Record 2231


Suggestions for Research

Future research in this area could include conducting a large study
of just teen travelers in the GTA to get a more statistical snapshot of
some of the topics explored in this work. In addition, the economics
of various mode choices could be teased out to determine the differ-
ent costs associated with various household transportation options
that involve youth travelers. The methodological framework can
also be extended to look at other mobility-limited groups such as
low-income travelers and the elderly.
To lessen auto-oriented travel behavior in general, it is important for
large regions such as the GTA to coordinate land use planning with
transportation planning. Current planning patterns make it difficult to
implement quick fixes for improving the transit system. It is hard to
increase the frequency of service in regions that are not built to gener-
ate high numbers of transit users. However, what does this mean for
those living in these areas, without access to a private vehicle? These
planning patterns make autonomous travel very difficult for this group.
Therefore, the most important, overarching message is that dispersed,
low-density, single-use planning will never be conducive to efficient
public transportation and walkable neighborhoods.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council, as well as by the Government of Ontario.


REFERENCES

1. McDonald, N. C. Exploratory Analysis of Children’s Travel Patterns. In
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, No. 1977, Transportation Research Board of the National Acade-
mies, National Research Council, Washington, D.C., 2006, pp. 1–7.
2. Frank, L. D., and H. A. McKay. Time to Walk the Talk: Embracing the
Built Environment to Promote Physical Mobility. British Journal of
Sports Medicine, Vol. 44, No. 9, 2010, p. 615.
3. Panter, J. R., and A. P. Jones. Associations Between Physical Activity,
Perceptions of the Neighbourhood Environment and Access to Facili-
ties in an English City. Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 67, No. 11,
2010, pp. 1917–1923.
4. Anderson, W. P., P. S. Kanaroglou, and E. J. Miller. Urban Form,

Energy and the Environment: A Review of Issues, Evidence and Policy.
Urban Studies, Vol. 33, No. 1, 1996, pp. 7–35.
5. Bhat, C. R. A Model of Post-Home Arrival Activity Participation
Behavior. Transportation Research, Part B, Vol. 32, 1988, pp. 387–400.
6. Damm, D., and S. R. Lerman. A Theory of Activity Scheduling Behav-
iour. Transportation and Planning, Vol. 13A, 1981, pp. 703–718.
7. McDonald, N. C. Household Interactions and Children’s School Travel:
The Effect of Parental Work Patterns on Walking and Biking to School.
Journal Transport Geography, Vol. 16, 2008, pp. 324–331.
8. Blumenberg, E. En-Gendering Effective Planning: Spatial Mismatch,
Low-Income Women, and Transportation Policy. Journal of the Amer-
ican Planning Association, Vol. 70, No. 3, 2004, pp. 269–281.
9. Kwan, M. Gender, the Home–Work Link, and Space–Time Patterns of
Nonemployment Activities. Economic Geography, Vol. 75, No. 4, 1999,
pp. 370–394.
10. Cain, A. Teenage Mobility in the United States: Issues and Opportuni-
ties for Promoting Public Transit. In Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1971, Transporta-
tion Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
2006, pp. 140–148.
11. Trowbridge, M. J., and N. C. McDonald. Urban Sprawl and Miles
Driven Daily by Teenagers in the United States. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, Vol. 34, No. 3, 2008, pp. 202–206.
12. McDonald, N. C. Critical Factors for Active Transportation to School
Among Low-Income and Minority Students. Evidence from the 2001
