

Spatial Analysis of Child Pedestrian
and Bicycle Crashes
Development of Safety Performance Function
for Areas Adjacent to Schools

Adam McArthur, Peter T. Savolainen, and Timothy J. Gates

Pedestrian and bicycle safety for school-aged children is a particular
concern as traffic crashes continue to be a leading cause of death for
children 5 to 14 years old. For this concern to be addressed, Safe Routes
to School (SRTS) programs have been implemented in communities
across the country, with one of the primary objectives being to provide
safe and convenient routes for children to walk or bike to school. Unfor-
tunately, SRTS programs allocate limited funding for such projects.
Consequently, it is imperative that programs are implemented at loca-
tions where they are likely to have the greatest impact. The primary
focus of this study was to develop a safety performance function (SPF)
for use in prioritizing candidate schools for SRTS programs. Traffic
crashes over a 5-year analysis period were examined and linked to
data that included the school enrollment, the socioeconomic and demo-
graphic data for each school district, and the functional class of the
roadway on which each school was located. Schools on local roads were
found to experience more crashes than those located on other, higher-
class road facilities. Crashes also varied with average family size, num-
ber of parents per household, population density, and median family
income. Crashes were less frequent in school districts that exhibited
greater ethnic diversity. The SPF developed as a part of this research
can be used for prioritization of candidate schools as well as to assess
the efficacy of SRTS programs on a longitudinal basis and thus provide
a valuable tool for school administrators and others involved in child
pedestrian and bicycle safety.


Each year, more than 4,000 pedestrians and nearly 700 bicyclists
are fatally injured in traffic crashes throughout the United States
(1, 2). Although pedestrian and bicycle traffic comprises a very
small proportion of all travel nationwide, these fatalities account for
15% of the national total. Pedestrian and bicycle safety is a particu-
lar concern among school-aged children because pedestrian fatali-
ties account for 19% to 23% of all traffic fatalities among children
ages 0 to 15, while 10% of all bicyclist fatalities involved children in
this youngest age group (1, 2). Child pedestrian and bicyclist activ-
ity tends to be highest during the periods before and after school,


Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Wayne State University,
5050 Anthony Wayne Drive, Detroit, MI 48202. Corresponding author: P. T.
Savolainen, savolainen@wayne.edu.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,

No. 2465, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,
D.C., 2014, pp. 57–63.
DOI: 10.3141/2465-08










periods that also tend to coincide with high levels of traffic volume,
increasing the potential risk for child pedestrian crashes (3).
Safety concerns present one of several factors that explain the rela-
tively low rate of children who currently walk or bike to school (4, 5).
Prior research has shown various demographic, attitudinal, psycho-
social, and environmental factors to influence parents’ decisions as to
whether to allow children to walk or bike to school. Among the most
influential factors are land use and geographic factors, income, paren-
tal attitudes and schedules, and traffic- and crime-related fears (6, 7).
Children with less independent mobility, fewer traveling companions,
and those less likely to engage in conversations about safety have
been found more likely to be driven to school (8). Parental interven-
tion and influence may increase rates of active travel to school (ATS)
for both pedestrian and bicyclists (9, 10). In support of increased
ATS, a national study of state laws showed that legislation requiring
minimum busing distances, hazardous route exemptions, crossing
guards, speed zones, and other traffic control measures all influenced
ATS policies (11). Within the scope of planning and engineering, the
proximity of homes to a school, the level of traffic exposure in the sur-
rounding neighborhood, and the connectivity of the roadway network
around the school have all been shown to be significant determinants
of children walking or bicycling to school (12–14).
To address some of the aforementioned issues, Safe Routes to
School (SRTS) programs have been implemented in communities
across the country, with one of the primary objectives being to pro-
vide safe and convenient routes for children to walk or bike to school.
The SRTS program funds a variety of projects, including infrastructure
improvements (e.g., sidewalk and bike lane installation), educational
programs, and on-site safety audits.
Unfortunately, SRTS programs allocate limited funding for such
projects. Consequently, it is imperative that programs are imple-
mented at locations where they are likely to have the greatest impact.
To this end, the National Center for Safe Routes to School presented
a practical process for identifying and prioritizing schools for SRTS
programs (15). This methodology provided a balance between what
is known about preventing child pedestrian injuries and what can
realistically be accomplished without having to perform compre-
hensive field reviews of each site. Primary emphases for prioritiza-

tion are centered on three major factors: crash history, public and
school officials’ concerns, and current or potential pedestrian use.
While this framework presents a promising starting point, its appli-

cation is somewhat limited because of the relative infrequency of

child pedestrian and bicycle crashes near schools and the inherent
subjectivity involved in the more qualitative assessments.


57

58


The objective of this research was to develop a safety performance
function (SPF) for K–8 schools that could be used as part of a data-
driven approach to assist communities in identifying or prioritizing
candidate schools for SRTS funding. Furthermore, this SPF can also
be used to conduct longitudinal assessments of the effectiveness of
SRTS programs in reducing child pedestrian and bicycle crashes,
filling an important gap in the research literature (16).


Literature Review

The research literature includes a few studies that have examined
crashes involving school-aged pedestrian or bicyclists, as well as

a more extensive volume of recent research that has examined

pedestrian- and bicycle-involved crashes more broadly.



Studies of Pedestrian and Bicycle Crashes

Involving Children

A 1997 study in England involved the development of a procedure
to identify the number crashes occurring during the commute to and
from school (17). Schools were ranked on the basis of the number
of crashes occurring within a 250-m radius from 8:00 to 9:00 a.m.
and from 3:30 to 4:30 p.m. Crash statistics were subsequently linked
to self-reported travel data. The resultant crash rates were compared
between two school locations, though no significant differences were
identified.
Exploratory spatial analysis was used to map the distribution of
crashes involving child pedestrians less than 10 years of age in Lille,
France (18). The results showed that crashes tended to be concentrated
in a select number of areas rather than randomly localized across
space. Furthermore, the proportion of crashes tended to decrease at
distances further from schools.
A more recent study in Baltimore, Maryland, examined pedestrian-
involved crashes in the vicinity of public schools (19). Separate models
were estimated to examine crash frequency and severity. The results
showed that both measures tended to decrease at locations where
driveways or turning bays were present near the school entrance.
Conversely, both frequency and severity increased when recreational
facilities were present on the site. Each of these factors is likely to be
capturing the effects of varying exposure, as are several of the other
significant variables identified in the study, which included transit
access, commercial access, and population density.
Spatial and temporal analyses of child pedestrian crashes in
Santiago, Chile, were conducted to identify critical areas that exhib-
ited high crash concentrations and frequencies for periods of 5 or
more years during the period from 2000 to 2008 (20). Seven critical
areas were identified and these areas tended to be located in districts
with lower-middle socioeconomic statuses. Crashes tended to be
clustered by time of day and no trends were evident with respect to
the children’s ages, which ranged from 5 to 18 years old.


General Spatial Analyses of Pedestrian-
and Bicycle-Involved Crashes

Beyond studies focused on schools and young children, there has
been considerable recent research to assess the crash risks of pedes-
trians and bicyclists. A study in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, mapped
commuter cyclist collision risk per distance traveled (21). The authors
Transportation Research Record 2465


recommended this method be used as a basis for transportation
policy as opposed to more traditional analyses focused on rates
per capita.
A spatial epidemiologic approach was used to study the relative
risk factors of bicycle and pedestrian crashes at the neighborhood
level in Buffalo, New York (22). Among the factors considered in
the evaluation were roadway functional classes, as well as socio-
economic and demographic variables. Results show neighborhood-
level characteristics, such as ethnicity, education level, and land
use type, to significantly influence the frequency of pedestrian and
bicycle crashes.
A study in four Florida counties examined trends in crash frequency

with respect to trip productions and attractions within traffic analysis

zones while controlling for the effects of road characteristics (23).

The results showed that pedestrians and bicyclists tended to be over-
represented in intersection crashes. Crashes involving pedestrians
and bicyclists also tended to increase with trip productions and trip

attractions on a zonal level, while crashes were underrepresented on

roads with a 35-mph speed limit.
A New York City study involved the development of a random
parameter negative binomial model to examine factors influencing
the frequency of pedestrian crashes at the census tract level (24).
Crashes tended to be higher in African-American and Hispanic neigh-
borhoods, as well as in areas with lower levels of education. Areas
with more schools or more concentrated commercial or industrial
development were also prone to more crashes.
A study in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, used linear regression to
examine the density of pedestrian crash data at the census tract
level (25). Pedestrian crashes were more likely in areas with greater
population and employment density, higher levels of commercial
and retail land use, and larger proportions of persons age 65 and
older.
Collectively, the extant research literature summarized here
shows that a variety of analytical techniques can be utilized to assess
pedestrian and bicycle crashes in a spatial context. Regardless of
the approach, several common factors emerge as important, par-
ticularly information about the transportation infrastructure, as
well as socioeconomic and demographic characteristics.


Methodology

Available safety resources are optimally invested at those locations
that present the greatest opportunity to reduce the frequency of traf-
fic crashes, injuries, and fatalities. Traditionally, such locations were
identified on the basis of historical crash counts. However, given
the random and rare nature of traffic crashes, such data may not
necessarily lead to the identification of the locations with the high-
est potential for crashes in the future. This is particularly true for
pedestrian- and bicycle-involved crashes, which tend to occur much
less frequently on a site-specific basis in comparison with motor
vehicle crashes.
In light of these facts, the Highway Safety Manual suggests that
historical crash counts be supplemented with crash estimates pro-
vided by SPFs (26). SPFs allow for the prediction of the expected
number of crashes at a given location based on site-specific infor-
mation, such as exposure (e.g., traffic volumes), roadway geometry,
and other relevant factors that are correlated with crash counts. The
primary focus of this study was to develop an SPF for use in the
Michigan SRTS program.










































P






























McArthur, Savolainen, and Gates                                                                                                              59


Data Collection and Summary                                                 approximated by a Poisson or negative binomial distribution, with
roughly 50% of the schools experiencing zero crashes during the
To develop the SPFs, details of those schools eligible for SRTS fund-       analysis period.
ing were obtained from the State of Michigan’s Center for Educational          The school and crash data were then combined with demographic
Performance and Information, which is responsible for the collection        and socioeconomic information obtained from the United States
and analysis of performance data for Michigan’s K–12 public schools         Census Bureau (29). These data were obtained at the school dis-
and students (27). Data were collected for a total of 2,404 schools         trict level and matched with each of the K–8 schools included in
that included any students in grades kinder­garten through eighth           the study. The data included as a part of the analysis were aver-
grade. Each school was geocoded in a geographic information system          age family size (number of persons in the household related to the
database for use in the subsequent spatial analysis.                        householder); average number of parents in each household; total
The spatial analysis involved using the coordinates for each             district population by age, race, and sex; and median income. Vari-
school to create a 1-mi buffer. Data were then obtained for all             ous combinations of these and other socioeconomic characteristics
crashes involving bicycles and child pedestrians ages 5 to 14 (kinder­      were examined as part of the modeling process.
garten through eighth grade) within the buffer surrounding each of             Finally, the National Functional Class (NFC) code (30) was
the schools. These data were obtained from the Michigan State Police        obtained for the primary roadway on which each school was located
(MSP) crash database, a condensed version of which can be accessed          based on its official address. This information was obtained from
from the MSP Office of Highway Safety Planning’s Michigan Traf-             the Michigan Department of Transportation roadway database (31).
fic Crash Facts Data Query Tool (28). Given the limited number of           Table 1 provides summary statistics for those factors that were found
crashes experienced on an annual basis at even the schools with the         to be significant as a part of the analysis.
highest crash frequencies, 5 years of data were obtained (from 2007
to 2011). A total of 7,781 crashes occurred at the eligible schools
over the 5-year analysis period. Figure 1 provides both a probabil-         Statistical Methods
ity density function and cumulative distribution function, which
illustrate the percentage of schools that experienced specific crash        Once the analysis data set was created, an SPF was estimated to
frequencies during the analysis period. The data appear to be well          examine the relationships between the factors listed in Table 1 and



100


90


80


70
ercentage of Schools




60


50


40


30


20


10


0
0             5                               10                                15                               20
Number of Child Pedestrian and Bicyclist Involved Crashes, 2007 to 2011

Probability Density Function             Cumulative Distribution Function

FIGURE 1   Probability density and cumulative distribution functions of crashes involving child pedestrian and bicyclist within 1 mi of a school,
2007 to 2011.

60


TABLE 1   Summary Statistics

Variable                                Mean

Child pedestrian–bicycle crash data
   Crashes from 2007 to 2011                   1.31
Census data
   Average family size                       3.05
   Children ages 5 to 14                10,543
   Average parents per household             1.72
   Median family income ($)             54,626
   Population density (1,000 per mi2)        1.60
   Proportion of nonwhite households         0.19
Roadway functional class
   Local roads (proportion)                    0.51
  Collectors (proportion)                      0.23
   Arterials (proportion)                      0.26
School data
  Students enrolled                       397

Note: SD = standard deviation.




the frequency of child pedestrian and bicycle crashes near each
school during the 5-year analysis period.
Consistent with contemporary research (32) and the recommended
methodology from the Highway Safety Manual (26), the SPF takes
the form of a negative binomial regression model. The negative bino-
mial specification provides the probability P(ni) of school i experi-
encing a total of ni child pedestrian- or bicycle-involved crashes over

the 5-year analysis period:

G (<U+03B8> + ni ) <U+03B8>
P (ni ) =              ui (1 - ui ) i
n
(1)
G (<U+03B8>) ni!


where
ui   =   <U+03B8>/(<U+03B8> + <U+03BB>i),
<U+03B8>    =   1/a,
G(•)   =   gamma function, and
<U+03BB>i    =   mean number of crashes at given location.

The variable <U+03BB>i is a linear function of covariates:

<U+03BB> i = exp (ßX i + ei )                                                  (2)

where

Xi =	vector of data describing the traffic, socioeconomic,
demographic, and enrollment characteristics of school i;
ß = vector of estimable parameters; and

exp(ei) =	gamma-distributed error term with mean one and
variance a.
The resultant mean variance relationship is given by

var [ ni ] = E ( ni )[1 + aE ( ni )]                                    (3)

If a is significantly different from zero, the data are overdispersed
or underdispersed. If a is equal to zero, then the negative binomial
reduces to the Poisson distribution. Estimation of <U+03BB>i can be conducted
through standard maximum likelihood procedures (32).
Transportation Research Record 2465




SD                   Maximum          Minimum


2.17             0                18

0.18                2.34               3.98
23,349                  25            102,261
0.13                1.25               1.89
19,420               9,906            163,366
1.86                0.002             10.76
0.23                0.02               0.97

0.50             0                 1
0.42             0                 1
0.44             0                 1

203                  10             1,298






Given the nature by which crashes occur, as well as the available
data, it is reasonable to expect unobserved heterogeneity because
of the presence of unobserved factors (e.g., pedestrian and vehicular
volumes, detailed roadway geometry, etc.). For this heterogeneity to
be accounted for, the constant term is allowed to vary as


ßi = ß + <U+03C9> i                                                           (4)


where <U+03C9>i is a randomly distributed term. For the constant, this term


is assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero and variance s2.

The probabilities are now conditional based on the probability dis-
tribution of <U+03C9>i. A simulation-based maximum likelihood method is
used to estimate the model parameters, further details of which can
be found elsewhere (33, 34). In the research literature, this model
formulation is also referred to as a random effects model.


Results and Discussion

This random effects negative binomial model is presented in Table 2,
which includes parameter estimates, standard errors, P-values, and
marginal effects. Marginal effects represent the effect on the expected
frequency, <U+03BB>i, that is associated with a one-unit change in each
independent variable. Marginal effects are calculated as follows:


<U+2202><U+03BB> i
ME <U+03BB>xiki =         = ß k exp (ßX i )                                   (5)
<U+2202> xik

where
xik = value of the kth independent variable for school i,
ßk = estimated parameter for the kth independent variable, and
<U+03BB>i = expected crash count for school i.
Marginal effects are calculated for each observation and then averaged
across the entire sample.
In examining the model results, they are generally found to be
consistent with a priori expectations. First, the standard deviation of

McArthur, Savolainen, and Gates


TABLE 2   Random Effects Negative Binomial


Parameter

Constant
  Standard deviation
Log (child population ages 5–14)
Log (K–8 enrollment)
School located on local roadway
Average family size
Population density (persons/mi2)
Median family income ($1,000)
Average parents per household
Proportion of nonwhite households
a (overdispersion parameter)

Note: na = not applicable; K = kindergarten




the constant term was found to be significantly different from zero,
which is evidence of unobserved heterogeneity (and random effects)
that is attributable to some important factors for which data were not
available. Second, the overdispersion parameter was also signifi-
cantly larger than zero, indicating that the negative binomial model
outperformed the more restrictive Poisson model (a finding that was
confirmed by comparing the log-likelihood values for the two models).
With respect to the variables of interest, crashes were found to
increase with the population of children ages 5 to 14 (correspond-
ing to grades kindergarten through eighth grade), as well as with the
number of students enrolled in each school. In lieu of actual count
data that indicate the number of children who walk or bike to school,
these variables are likely capturing the effects of such exposure.
This finding is consistent with prior work that has shown similar
trends with respect to student enrollment and population (19).
Also consistent with prior research (8), the location of the school
also affected the expected number of crashes. Schools that were
located on local roads (as per the NFC code) experienced more
crashes than schools that were located on higher-class collector or
arterial roads. This finding could be reflective of less regulated travel
behavior by both student commuters and motor vehicle drivers in
the area adjacent to the school. Field observation conducted as a part
of prior research in Michigan (35, 36) showed erratic behavior by
parents who were picking up or dropping off their children at school,
as well as by the children themselves who would frequently dart in
and out of traffic, particularly on lower-volume local roads. This
finding could also be attributable to underdevelopment of pedestrian
and bicycle facilities along local roadways that may discourage safe
crossing behavior (13). Finally, this factor could also be capturing
the effects of increased exposure as schools located on local roads
may be located within a subdivision. As a result, the proportion of
children walking or biking to and from school may be much higher
than that of a school located on a major roadway, where it may be
more likely that children would be picked up by parents or bused to
and from school.
Turning to the socioeconomic and demographic factors, crashes
were found to increase in school districts with larger average family
sizes. Children in larger households may be more apt to walk or bike
to school because of limitations in the number of available vehicles.
Similar dynamics may explain why crashes decrease in areas with
61


Model Results

Standard                    Marginal
Estimate         Error         P-Value       Effect

0.933          0.654          .153             na
0.635          0.021         <.001             na
0.228          0.020         <.001          0.168
0.066          0.014         <.001          0.049
0.172          0.038         <.001          0.126
0.326          0.127          .010          0.239
0.292             0.013         <.001         0.215
-0.017             0.001         <.001        -0.012
-2.214             0.403         <.001        -1.630
-1.644             0.217         <.001        -1.210
20.183             7.365          .006            na

.




more two-parent households. Two-parent households are more eas-
ily able to facilitate automobile transportation for children as shown
by previous studies (8, 12). A two-parent household would also
make it easier for one of the parents to walk or bike to school with
his or her children. This finding may also capture some effects of
greater parental interaction and oversight within such households.
Pedestrian and bicycle crashes were also found to increase in school
districts with greater population density, which is likely to reflect dif-
ferences in travel patterns as denser, more urbanized areas are likely to
have higher proportions of children walking or biking to school. Such
areas are also likely to be subject to higher traffic volumes, further ele-
vating the risks of crash involvement. Crash frequency was negatively
correlated with median family income. Higher income has generally
been associated with higher levels of education and higher-income
areas are also more likely to have greater availability of automobiles
for use in transportation children to and from school.
It is interesting that more diverse school districts (as measured
by the proportion of nonwhite families) were found to experience
fewer crashes than less diverse districts. However, the reasons for
this correlation are not easily explained and further research is
warranted to better understand the underlying causes of this result.


Conclusions

This study provides an important contribution to the state of the
art in the development of a safety performance function for use in
SRTS programs. The SPF could be calibrated to other jurisdictions
using the procedures outlined in the Highway Safety Manual (26).
The method can also be easily applied in other jurisdictions using
data that are available from the United States Census Bureau and
state transportation agencies. Such SPFs can be used for various
functions, including two that are of particular relevance for SRTS:

• Prioritizing candidate locations for subsequent investment
decisions. Locations that are in need of safety improvements can be
identified by comparing observed and expected safety performance.
Schools that have experienced significantly more pedestrian or bicy-
cle crashes than expected may be indicative of underlying safety
issues. Alternatively, schools that have experienced fewer crashes

62


than expected may reflect either safe campuses or luck because of
the random and rare nature of crashes.

• Conducting longitudinal evaluations of the effectiveness of
prior investments. Historically, evaluations of SRTS programs have
focused on whether the number of children walking and bicycling to
school has increased (16). Safety performance functions will allow

for a quantitative assessment of how well existing programs meet
the complementary objective of enhancing the safety for children
who walk and bike to school.


As a result of this research, decision makers will be able to more
efficiently prioritize schools for safety improvements or other SRTS
programs. In addition to providing this tool, the study results sup-
port prior research, which has associated a variety of socioeconomic,

demographic, and other school-specific factors with child pedestrian
and bicycle crashes (12–14).
Specific findings include the following:


• Crashes increased with the number of children enrolled at a
given school and with the population of children ages 5 to 14 in the
accompanying school district;
• Schools located on local roadways experience higher crash

frequencies than schools located on other, higher-class facilities;
and
• Crashes also varied with average family size, number of par-
ents per household, population density, and median family income.

Crashes were less frequent in school districts that exhibited greater
ethnic diversity.

This research can be expanded by conducting more in-depth investi-

gations that consider additional factors, such as pedestrian and motor
vehicle volumes, travel speeds, and infrastructure characteristics.



Acknowledgments

Funding for this research was provided by the Michigan Fitness
Foundation through the Michigan Department of Transportation

Safe Routes to School Program.



References

1. Traffic Safety Facts: 2010 Data—Pedestrians. Report DOT HS 811 625.
NHTSA, 2012.
2. Traffic Safety Facts: 2011 Data—Bicyclists. Report DOT HS 811 743.
NHTSA, 2013.
3. Yiannakoulias, N., W. Bland, and D. M. Scott. Altering School Atten-
dance Times to Prevent Child Pedestrian Injuries. Traffic Injury Preven-
tion, Vol. 14, 2013, pp. 405–412.
4. Larsen, K., R. N. Buliung, and G. E. J. Faulkner. Safety and School
Travel: How Does the Environment Along the Route Relate to Safety
and Mode Choice? In Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board, No. 2327, Transportation Research
Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., 2013, pp. 9–18.
5. Makarewicz, C. Vouchers, Magnet Schools, Charter Schools, and
Options: Analyzing the Effects of School and Housing Choices on
Mode Choice to School. In Transportation Research Record: Jour-
nal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2327, Transportation
Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., 2013,
pp. 1–8.
Transportation Research Record 2465


6. Yang, Y., and E. Markowitz. Integrating Parental Attitudes in Research
on Children’s Active School Commuting: Evidence from Community
School Travel Survey. In Transportation Research Record: Journal
of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2318, Transportation
Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., 2012,
pp. 116–127.
7. Stewart, O. Findings from Research on Active Transportation to School
and Implications for Safe Routes to School Programs. Journal of Plan-
ning Literature, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2011, pp. 127–150.
8. Price, A., D. Pluto, O. Ogoussan, and J. Banda. School Administra-
tors’ Perceptions of Factors That Influence Children’s Active Travel to
School. Journal of School Health, Vol. 81, No. 12, 2011, pp. 741–748.
9. Stone, M., K. Larsen, G. E. J. Faulkner, R. N. Buliung, K. P. Arbour-
Nicitopoulos, and J. Lay. Predictors of Driving Among Families Living
Within 2 km from School: Exploring the Role of the Built Environment.
Transport Policy, Vol. 33, 2014, pp. 8–16.
10. Emond, C., and S. Handy. Factors Associated with Bicycling to High
School: Insights from Davis, CA. Journal of Transport Geography,
Vol. 20, No. 1, 2012, pp. 71–79.
11. Zuniga, K. D. From Barrier Elimination to Barrier Negotiation: A Quali-
tative Study of Parents’ Attitudes About Active Travel for Elementary
School Trips. Transport Policy, Vol. 20, 2012, pp. 75–81.
12. Chriqui, J., D. Taber, S. Slater, L. Turner, K. Lowrey, and F. Chaloupka.
The Impact of State Safe Routes to School-Related Laws on Active
Travel to School Policies and Practices in U.S. Elementary Schools.
Health and Place, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2012, pp. 8–15.
13. Stewart, O. Findings from Research on Active Transportation to School
and Implications for Safe Routes to School Programs. Journal of Plan-
ning Literature, Vol. 26, No. 2, 2011, pp. 127–150.
14. Trapp, G. S. A., B. Giles-Corti, H. E. Christian, M. Bulsara, A. F. Timperio,
G. R. McCormack, and K. P. Villanueva. On Your Bike! A Cross-Sectional
Study of the Individual, Social and Environmental Correlates of Cycling
to School. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical
Activity, Vol. 8, 2011, pp. 123–132.
15. Sundstrom, C., N. Pullen-Seufert, M. Cornog, M. Cynecki, and K. Chang.
Prioritizing Schools for Safe Routes to School Infrastructure Projects. ITE
Journal, Vol. 80, No. 2, 2010, pp. 24–28.
16. Dumbaugh, E., and L. Frank. Traffic Safety and Safe Routes to Schools:
Synthesizing the Empirical Evidence. In Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2009, Transportation
Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., 2007,
pp. 89–97.
17. Austin, K., M. Tight, and H. Kirby. The Use of Geographic Information
Systems to Enhance Road Safety Analysis. Transportation Planning
and Technology, Vol. 20, No. 3, 1997, pp. 249–266.
18. Banos, A., and F. Huguenin-Richard. Spatial Distribution of Road Acci-
dents in the Vicinity of Point Sources: Application to Child Pedestrian
Accidents. Geography and Medicine, 2000, pp. 54–64.
19. Clifton, K., and K. Kreamer-Fults. An Examination of the Environ-
mental Attributes Associated with Pedestrian–Vehicular Crashes Near
Public Schools. Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 39, 2007,
pp. 708–715.
20. Blazquez, C. A., and M. S. Celis. A Spatial and Temporal Analysis of
Child Pedestrian Crashes in Santiago, Chile. Accident Analysis and
Prevention, Vol. 50, 2013, pp. 304–311.
21. Yiannakoulias, N., S. Bennet, and D. Scott. Mapping Commuter Cycling
Risk in Urban Areas. Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 45, 2012,
pp. 164–172.
22. Delmelle, E., J. Thill, and H. Ha. Spatial Epidemiologic Analysis of
Relative Collision Risk Factors Among Urban Bicyclists and Pedestri-
ans. Transportation Journal, Vol. 39, 2012, pp. 433–448.
23. Abdel-Aty, M., C. Siddiqui, H. Huang, and X. Wang. Integrating Trip
and Roadway Characteristics to Manage Safety in Traffic Analysis
Zones. In Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transporta-
tion Research Board, No. 2213, Transportation Research Board of the
National Academies, Washington, D.C., 2011, pp. 20–28.
24. Ukkusuri, S., S. Hasan, and H. M. Abdul Aziz. Random Parameter
Model Used to Explain Effects of Built-Environment Characteristics
on Pedestrian Crash Frequency. In Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2237, Transporta-
tion Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.,
2011, pp. 98–106.
