

Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


Travel Behaviour and Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tbs




Taking the bus? Barriers and facilitators for adolescent use of public buses to                                                                               T
school
Jennifer S. Mindella, , Christina Erglerb, Debbie Hopkinsc, Sandra Mandicd,e
<U+204E>

a
Research Department of Epidemiology & Public Health, UCL, London, UK
b
School of Geography, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
c
Transport Studies Unit, School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
d
Active Living Laboratory, School of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise Science, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
e
Centre for Sustainability, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand




ARTICLE INFO                                                ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                                   Transport to school can contribute significantly to adolescents’ physical activity but in New Zealand – as in many
Public buses                                                other countries around the world – many adolescents are driven to school. Public transport offers an opportunity
Adolescents                                                 to integrate incidental active transport into school commutes. In this paper, we bring together multiple sources
New Zealand                                                 of data into a multi-method study to elucidate the barriers to and facilitators of public transport use by ado­
School travel
lescents for school travel in Dunedin, New Zealand, a city with low rates of public transport use. The data include
Active travel
a public bus survey from Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey (OSSLS, 1391 adolescents); the Built
Secondary schools
Environment Active Transport to School (BEATS) Study parental survey (350 parents), focus groups (54 ado­
lescents, 25 parents, 12 teachers) and semi-structured interviews (12 principals); interviews with three policy-
makers from local/regional/national agencies; and analysis of 10 relevant local/regional/national strategies/
transport plans. The findings show how distance to school, cost, parental trip chaining, built environment fea­
tures, the weather, convenience, and safety perceptions are major barriers to using public transport to school.
Moreover, current transport planning documents do not favour public health. A number of recommendations
that could increase public transport use are made including: raising parking prices to discourage parents driving
and trip-chaining; improving bus infrastructure and services; providing subsidies; and changing perceptions of
public transport use and users. These actions, however, require collaboration between government authorities
across the local, regional and national scale.




1. Introduction                                                                                   Zealand children and adolescents are inadequate (Smith et al., 2018a,b)
with just under 40% of those aged 8–18 years meeting minimum phy­
Travel can provide access to employment and education, as well as                             sical activity guidelines (=60 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical
opportunities for physical activity and social engagement (Mindell                                activity (MVPA) every day) (Kek et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2018a).
et al., 2011). How people travel affects both their own health and that                           Given reported reductions in physical activity (Aubert et al., 2018) and
of others (Cohen et al., 2014). Many factors affect travel mode choice,                           rises in obesity at all ages in most high income countries, the oppor­
including perceptions of transport modes (e.g. perceptions of public                              tunity to use active travel (primarily walking and/or cycling) to in­
transport in car-dominated societies (Murray et al., 2010)); political                            corporate physical activity into everyday life is particularly important.
frameworks and environment; funding regimes; and the built and nat­                                   The use of public transport is often associated with ‘active travel’,
ural environment. New Zealand’s transport system is characterised by                              with opportunities for increased physical activity to and from bus, tram
high private vehicle ownership and use (Hopkins et al., 2015); limited                            and train stations (Bartels et al., 2016; Besser and Dannenberg, 2005;
availability and utilisation of public transport; and low rates of active                         Durand et al., 2016; Jones et al., 2012; Lachapelle and Pinto, 2016;
transport (Shaw and Russell, 2016). At the same time, New Zealand had                             Rissel et al., 2012). Public transport, which has a range of potential
the third highest adult obesity prevalence among OECD countries in                                benefits for the health of the planet and of people, offers the opportu­
2017, while 36% of 10–14 year olds were overweight or obese in 2016/                              nity to access educational, health and social sites while still in­
2017 (Ministry of Health, 2017). Physical activity levels in New                                  corporating a degree of physical activity and independence.


<U+204E>
Corresponding author at: HSSRG, Epidemiology & Public Health, UCL, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
E-mail address: j.mindell@ucl.ac.uk (J.S. Mindell).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2020.08.006
Received 18 December 2019; Received in revised form 14 July 2020; Accepted 11 August 2020
Available online 28 August 2020
2214-367X/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. This is an open access article under the
CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




















































































J.S. Mindell, et al.


This is important, because rates of active travel to school have fallen in
New Zealand over the past several decades (Ministry of Transport, 2015),
similar to many high- (Gray et al., 2014) and middle-income countries (de
Sá et al., 2015). In 2010–2014, only 3% of New Zealand adolescents
regularly cycled and 27% walked to school (Ministry of Transport, 2015).
This is mirrored by New Zealand adolescents’ ongoing preference for car-
based travel (Hopkins et al., 2019) and substantially less independent
mobility for schoolchildren compared with earlier generations (Bhosale
et al., 2017; Ergler, 2020; Porskamp et al., 2019). Barriers to active travel
to school by New Zealand adolescents include home-to-school distance,
time constraints, after-school activities, lack of social support, the con­
venience of being driven to school, the weather, environmental factors
such as lack of cycle parking or cycle paths, lack of interest, and both
adolescents’ and parents’ concerns regarding traffic safety and absence of
school zoning (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017; Ikeda et al., 2018; Kearns et al.,
2012; Mandic et al., 2015a,b, 2017, 2020).
Little is known about the factors which enable and constrain the use
of public buses for school travel, unlike the myriad of studies of walking
or door-to-door school buses (Hinckson, 2016; Howley, 2001; Park and
Kim, 2010; Wilson et al., 2010) or public bus use in general (Barker
et al., 2019; Broome et al., 2010; Moore, 2012; Simons et al., 2013).
Distance is important, as is the bus service and quality including fre­
quency, journey time and connections (Wilson et al., 2010; Hinckson,
2016; Broome et al., 2010). Safety associated with crowdedness and
lack of seatbelts contribute to the negative perception of bus use
(Hinckson, 2016). Nonetheless, adolescents reported enjoying the time
to socialise on buses (Hinckson, 2016; Jones et al., 2012; Green et al.,
2014), but bullying and the costs of buses were seen as barriers (Barker
et al., 2019; Broome et al., 2010; Hinckson, 2016). In contrast, free
public bus schemes can be physically and socially enriching experiences
for young people (Goodman et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2012).
The research presented in this paper therefore aimed first to eluci­
date the specific barriers to and facilitators of public transport use by
adolescents for school travel in a city with low rates of public transport
use for this purpose. These data were complemented by analysis of
relevant national, regional and local transport policy documents and
interviews with policy-makers, to help identify potential strategies to
increase public bus use.

2. Methods

2.1. Context

The city of Dunedin (population c.130,000) is located on the east
coast of the South Island of Aotearoa New Zealand. Dunedin is a coastal
city with a territorial land area of 3,314.8 km2 and city-proper of
255 km2. Built on the mouth of a 20 km long natural harbour, Dunedin
has a relatively flat central business district (CBD), and hilly sur­
rounding suburbs. Much residential housing is situated on the hills,
requiring navigating often multiple hills and large distances to travel to
school and work. Dunedin’s transport system is therefore highly de­
pendent on private car transport. A bus network provides Dunedin’s
public transport system; this was used for only 1% of all trips in
2012–2014 (Early et al., 2015). It has been reported that the bus net­
work does not meet the expectations of users due to its low frequency
and route system (Early et al., 2015). Regarding using the bus network
for school travel, fewer than half of Dunedin’s adolescents enrol in the
closest school (Mandic et al., 2018), resulting in an increasing distance
to school, reduced rates of active transport to/from school, and in­
creased reliance on motorised transport, mainly by private vehicles
(Mandic et al., 2017; Keall et al., 2020).

2.2. Data sources

This paper reports on multiple data sources (Fig. 1) which engaged
with a variety of stakeholders on the question of public bus use by


Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58


secondary school students. The specific research questions and the data
sources used to address these are provided in Table 1. Each of the data
sources and relevant research methods are described briefly below and
summarised in Table 2.

2.2.1. Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey data
The Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey (OSSLS), conducted in
the Otago region of New Zealand in 2009, included adolescents from
ten of twelve Dunedin secondary schools (Mandic et al., 2012). All
participants signed consent prior to participation. For students under
the age of 16 years, parents had the option to sign parental opt-out
forms if they did not want their child to participate. The questionnaire
package included questions on demographics, school travel, lifestyle
habits and sport participation (Mandic et al., 2012) as well as public bus
service (including open-ended comments) and youth space preferences.
The questions relating to demographics, travel to school and public bus
use in Dunedin were analysed using descriptive statistics. Findings
(including comments from open-ended questions about the public bus
service in Dunedin) were summarised and presented as a technical re­
port for the Dunedin City Council (DCC) and the Otago Regional
Council (ORC) (Mandic and Skidmore, 2010). Original research data
from that study were analysed for this paper.

2.2.2. Built Environment and Active Transport to School (BEATS) study
All 12 Dunedin secondary schools participated in the BEATS Study,
which was conducted in Dunedin, New Zealand 2013–2017 (Mandic
et al., 2016). The overall study included surveys of secondary school
students and their parents, focus groups with students, parents and
teachers and 12 semi-structured interviews with school principals
(Fig. 1, Table 2) as well as assessment of the built environment char­
acteristics of the home and school neighbourhoods. Participants signed
written consent prior to participation. For students under the age of 16,
parents signed either opt-in or opt-out consent, based on the school’s
preference.
Data from the bus to school section of the BEATS Parental Survey
completed by 350 parents (one parent per household) were used to
analyse parents’ perspectives on Dunedin adolescents’ use of public
buses to school (Table 1). BEATS focus groups and interviews were
designed and conducted by DH with another research staff member
present. Discussions covered a wide range of topics including but not
limited to the norms, experiences and perceptions of different transport
modes such as public transport (Mandic et al., 2016; Sandretto et al.,
2020). All sessions were recorded and subsequently transcribed. LC (see
CRediT statement) developed a coding framework and coded all tran­
scripts of the interviews with adolescents, parents, teachers and prin­
cipals, with a particular focus on participants’ perspectives on facil­
itators and barriers to bus transport to school. The initial codes were
regularly discussed and checked by CE and then developed into themes
(Braun and Clarke, 2006). The qualitative interviews along with the
open-ended comments in the adolescents’ bus survey provided insights
into the complexities of why using a bus to school seems to be less
appealing than other modes of transport for many people. An overview
of the themes and sub-themes developed is provided in Table 3. Four
main themes were created: 1. transport mode; 2. perceptions, knowl­
edge and experience; 3. climate and weather; and 4. school travel re­
sponsibilities.

2.2.3. Policy analysis
Three national, three regional and four local/city level policy
documents published between 2003 and September 2017 (Table 4)
were chosen to gain insights into the land transport hierarchy of New
Zealand and how public transport is planned for different levels. These
ten documents were selected based on their relevance to transport to
school both in the national and local context and ranged from legally
binding documents to strategic documents and plans. All documents
were publicly available, downloaded from the official government

49

J.S. Mindell, et al.




Fig. 1. Data sources, par


websites and then coded thematically and assessed as to whether they:
discussed transport to school; considered public health from a transport
perspective; approached public health from a physical activity point of
view; and/or placed any emphasis on transport diversity. The policy
analysis informed the development of the interview schedule with
policy-makers to gain, for example, a better understanding of existing
and planned integration initiatives and roadblocks for a move towards a
more intgrated, multi-modal transport system (section 2.2.4).


2.2.4. Policy-maker interviews

Interviews were undertaken with three policy-makers working in

Dunedin, to provide further insight on public transport issues raised by

the adolescents, parents, teachers and principals and on policy issues

that emerged as a result of the policy analysis such as planned and

desirable initiative for enticing public transport in light of known usage

barriers. Interviews were conducted with one person from each of the

New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA), ORC, and DCC. These three

agencies - directly and indirectly - shape and implement policy direc­

tives into the Dunedin transport system and thus can provide institu­

tional insights. Individuals were selected based on their knowledge and

involvement in shaping and oversights of Dunedin’s transport system at

the local, regional and national level. Participants were invited by email

and they signed written consent prior to participation. These inter­

views, designed and conducted by LC (see CRediT statement), focused

on barriers and enablers for adolescents using public transport to
school; issues for developing an effective public transport policy to
school; the role of policy for increasing public transport use; and gen­
eral issues of the current transport system. The interviews were digitally
recorded, transcribed, coded and analysed thematically by LC with
input from CE. Three themes were developed from interviews with
policy-makers relating to: barriers and enablers for using public trans­
port; issues of the current transport system and for developing an ef­
fective transport policy; and the role of policy for increasing public

transport use (Table 5).

2.3. A multi-method approach

This paper brings the four methods and datasets described above
into conversation using a multi-method approach. Multi-method ap­
proaches differ from mixed methods, as they may not be designed with
multiple methods in mind, and thus the ‘mixing’ of the different data


Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58




ticipants and a project output.


sets is not pre-planned, but rather occurs after all of the data sets have
been independently collected and analysed. This approach overcomes
the inherent weaknesses and limitations from the different methods
independently, and deliberately combines a diversity of methods within
one investigation (Brewer and Hunter, 1989). Yet like some forms of
mixed methods, the different methods are “practiced in parallel…
[weaving] together diverse research techniques to fill gaps, add context,
envision multiple truths, play different sources of data off each other, and
provide a sense of both the general and the particular” (Cope and Elwood,
2009: p5). This relates to a pragmatist philosophical stance which fo­

cuses on ‘what works’ for a particular topic, question or concern

(Rossman and Wilson, 1985). In the present investigation, our use of

multiple methods allowed us to engage with wider sets of actor groups,

perspectives and understandings around bus use in the case study city,

Dunedin. None of the methods or data sets, and thus no participant

groups, were prioritised, but all were viewed as equally important for

helping us to understand bus use. In doing so we shed light on the

diversity and complexity of needs and experiences and thus provide

richer strategies to increase public bus use than a single method or

dataset is able to do. The data were collected at different times over an

8-year period (2009–2017), therefore they were collected sequentially.

The different methods were brought together to help the authors un­

derstand the barriers to and facilitators of adolescent use of public buses

for school transport in a comprehensive and detailed way and to for­

mulate relevant policy suggestions and strategies.


2.4. Research ethics

Research ethics approval was obtained for each of these studies
from the University of Otago Ethics Committee (reference numbers: 13/
203 (BEATS); 09/128 (OSSLS); D17/299 (policy-maker interviews)).


3. Results

3.1. Survey of adolescents in Dunedin: Findings from the Otago School
Students Lifestyle Survey (2009)

In 2009, 1398 students (54% boys; age: 15.1 ± 1.2 years; 79%
school years 9–10, 21% school years 11–13; 76% New Zealand
European) from ten Dunedin secondary schools completed Young
People’s Bus Survey as part of the Otago School Students Lifestyle

50

J.S. Mindell, et al.




















































































































































Use of data sources to






































Table 1








Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58


Survey (OSSLS). Overall, 61% of Dunedin secondary school students

Policy documents review
used public buses, with no significant difference between school years.
In the total sample, the most common locations that students travelled
to by bus were school (22%), shops in the town/city centre (29%) and
other shops (16%) and recreational facilities (11%).
Among public bus users, 15% used the bus to get to school on a daily
basis, 22% nearly every day, 15% once or twice per week and 49%
never or hardly ever. Less than 8% of public bus users reported daily or

v

v
nearly daily use of public bus to all other locations. Overall, 57% of
students usually travelled on the bus with friend(s), 27% travelled
alone, 7% with a sibling, 4% with a parent or other adult, and 5% with
other(s). Among students who used public bus, 72% liked travelling by
Key informant




bus. The most frequently reported reasons why students liked travelling
interviews




by bus included: getting to a desired location (89%); socialising with
friends on the bus (85%); the bus being warmer and drier than walking
or cycling (83%); independence (82%); taking a bus being easier than
v

v




walking or cycling (75%); and no need to look for a car park (72%).
Students also perceived bus drivers as friendly (52%) and buses as an
environmentally friendly way to travel (60%) and safer than cycling
(63%).
Otago School Students




The most frequently reported barriers to public bus use among
adolescents were cost, being driven around by parents, travelling long
Lifestyle Survey




distances, infrequent and slow bus service, unsuitable bus timetable and
lack of knowledge of the bus timetable (Table 6). Compared with bus
users, a greater proportion of students who were not using public bus
reported barriers associated with the public bus cost, waiting or getting
v
v




v




to the bus stop, lack of company for riding on the bus and lack of
Built Environment and Active Transport to School




knowledge of the bus timetable (Table 6). Non-bus users also reported
higher rates of being driven around by parents and of car ownership
and were less concerned with the bus frequency and timetables com­
pared with bus users.

3.2. Survey of parents of adolescents in Dunedin: Findings from the BEATS
Parental Survey (2014–2017)

Parents (n = 350; parent age 47.5 ± 5.2 years; 77% females) of
secondary school students (student age 14.9 ± 1.6 years; 52% girls)
(BEATS) Study




from all 12 Dunedin secondary schools completed the BEATS Parental
Data sources




Survey (Mandic et al., 2020b). Overall, 72% of students used motorised
transport to school, 22% used active transport and 6% used mixed
modes. Nine percent of parents reported that their adolescent children
v
v

v




v




travel to school using public bus. The average distance to school was
What are the schools’ perceptions of the barriers to & facilitators of adolescents’ use of




7.2 ± 8.4 km (median: 4.4 km; IQR: 2.4 km to 9.5 km), with no sig­
What are the barriers & facilitators influencing adolescents’ use of public buses for




nificant difference between parents whose adolescents travelled to
What aspects should be considered by policy-makers when developing a public




school by bus and those whose adolescents who did not. Overall, 24%
How much are public buses used by adolescents for travel to/from school?




of parents reported having both public and school bus service available
What policies are likely to increase use of public buses for school travel?




near their home, 46% had public bus only, 21% had school bus only,
7% had no public or school bus service and 1% were unsure.
The most frequently reported parental barriers to public bus use
address specific research questions.




were adolescents’ extracurricular activities; perceived convenience of
car trip chaining; and the cost of public buses (Table 7.). Perceptions of
convenience of car trip chaining and living too close to school or too far
from a bus stop were significantly different between parents whose
transport to school policy for adolescents?




adolescents travelled to school by public bus compared with their
counterparts who did not.
public buses for school travel?




3.3. Findings from focus groups, interviews and open-ended survey
questions

The qualitative insights from parents and adolescents showed the
Research question




importance of private motorised transport, particularly as this related to
school travel?




perceived convenience, and cost. Convenient travel was interpreted as
“quick” and/or “easy” transport options, which in turn makes public
transport a less appealing transport mode. For example, one adolescent





stated that “I like to be able to be flexible with my travelling times because
there is too much pressure to catch the bus at the right time when I can just

51

J.S. Mindell, et al.                                                                                                                  Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48


Table 2
Summary of data sources and research methods.
Data                       Study (Year(s))       Participants               Recruitment                      Data collection details              References

Student survey             OSSLS (2019)          1398 adolescents from      Through school                   30–40 min online survey              (Mandic et al., 2012)
10 school                                                   Completed at school, during school
time, supervised by researchers
Parental survey            BEATS                 350 parents from 12        Through workplaces, social       20–25 min online or paper survey     Mandic et al., (2020)
(2014–2015)           school                     media, and at sporting events    Completed in spare time
Student focus groups       BEATS                 54 adolescents from 10     Through school                   45–60 min per session                (Hopkins et al., 2019;
(2014–2015)           schools                                                     10 sessions (1 per school)           Hopkins and Mandic, 2017)
Conducted at schools at lunch time
or immediately after school
Parental focus group       BEATS                 24 parents                 Through workplaces, social       45–60 min per session                (Hopkins and Mandic, 2017)
(2014–2015)                                      media, and at sporting events    6 sessions
Conducted after work hours
Teachers’ focus group      BEATS                 12 teachers from 2         Through school                   45–60 min per session                (Mandic et al., 2016)
(2013–2014)           schools                                                     2 sessions (1 per school)
Principal’s interview      BEATS                 12 school principals       Through school                   45–60 min per session                (Mandic et al., 2016;
(2014–2015)           from 12 schools                                             1 semi-structured interview (1 per   Sandretto et al., 2020)
school)
Conducted at school during school
time
Policy analysis            N/A (2017)            10 documents               Websites                         Key word search in local, regional   N/A
and national government websites
Key informant              N/A (2017)            3 policy-makers            Through professional contacts    30 min per session                   N/A
interviews                                                                                               1 session per person

BEATS: Built Environment and Active Transport to School Study; OSSLS: Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey.

Table 3                                                                                        reflected on the perceived ‘time savings’ accrued from being driven to
Analysis of qualitative data from focus groups, principal interviews and open-                 school (by parents, caregivers, friends), which were interpreted in re­
ended survey questions.                                                                        lation to time which may be spent waiting for and travel on buses.
Theme                                     Sub-theme (no. of references)                          Dunedin adolescents habitually use private vehicles for both school
and general travel purposes. This was coupled with parental practices,
Mode of transport                         Travel habits (72)                                 and perceived convenience to drop their children at school en-route to
•Convenience and trip chaining (29)
•Good parenting, decision making and
allowances (34)
or from work, even when this means their offspring has to arrive much
earlier than required. For example, a parent stated that: “I think it’s just
•Societal changes (4)                           whatever fits in with the parents, whatever makes it easier for the parents…
•Responsibilities for transport (5)             some children that I know of are being dropped off at school at like 8:00”

Perceptions, knowledge and
•Distance (13)
Costs (59)
[parental focus group 4]. Trip chaining is perceived as normal, appro­
experiences                              •Reliability and service offered (88)
priate and convenient within the busy family life. Families highlight the
•Being late by taking the bus (33)              extra financial costs associated with bus travel when the car is taken out
•Frequency of services (19)                     already: “If you’re driving into work then it will cost you more to put your
•Unreliable service (19)                        kids on a bus, it’s cheaper just to drop them off” [parental focus group 2].
•Route (17)
Negative experiences and perceptions of
This was reiterated by students, who noted that the bus “needs to be
using the bus ( 152)                               cheaper” and that “it costs way too much just for one zone” [bus survey].
•Bus drivers and treatment of passengers
(36)
While for some students their place of residence dictated their
choice of transport, others revealed that they had little input in the
•Timing, duration and route of service
(22)
decision making on their mobilities. For some, the distance to their

•Maintenance of buses (32)
school was simply “too far” to use public transport, with participants
•Other passengers and crowdedness (24)          stating that: “service is out of reach to some places I need to go” [bus
•Stigmatisation of buses and users (29)         survey]. Others did not have parental permission to use public transport
•Attitudes and boredom (12)                     or sought to avoid potential disagreements with their parents or family
•Health and concerns for health and
safety (26)
members. Moreover, many participants feared being late for school or
Unawareness of bus services and handling           other activities, with the potential for negative repercussions deterring
of buses (16)                                      them from using the bus: “Sometimes the buses are late and I might miss
Built environment (24)                             out on an important event or school” [bus survey]. School principals also
Environmental (Planetary health) (2)               highlighted that their pupils either arrive early or are late as public bus
Climate and weather                       Climate and weather (47)
schedules are not in synchronicity with the school day (see Table 3).
School travel responsibilities            (Dis)advantages of school bus services (16)
School transport policies (28)                     Participation in extracurricular activities also reinforces the use of
School choice (22)                                 private vehicles, with students stating: “I am so busy and I have so many
activities to go to so I don't really go on the bus” [bus survey].
It was not only the unreliability of the bus schedule, but also the
drive myself and not have to worry” [source: bus survey]. In turn, this                        infrequent running times of buses that create problems for adolescents
means that public bus transport becomes synonymous with a slower                               as “[t]ime table doesn’t work with what I want to do” [bus survey] and
speed, less reliability and lower frequency than alternatives – such as                        there are “[n]ot enough busses running, there are like 45 min gaps” [bus
the private car. Thus, perceptions of bus transport occur in direct re­                        survey]. The low uptake of bus use is also linked to students’ lack of
lation to other transport modes, and are interpreted through the lens of                       knowledge of how to use Dunedin buses, their unfamiliarity with the
the dominant car-based transport system. For instance, participants                            different routes, and managing the timetables. Therefore, it is not


52
–58
































































































J.S. Mindell, et al.


Table 4
The ten policy documents analysed for this research project.
N        Policy document

National policy documents:
#1       The Land Transport Management Act (LTMA)
#2       New Zealand Transport Agency’s 2013 Guidelines for preparing regional public
plans
#3       Government Policy Statement on Land Transport 2015
Regional policy documents:
#4       Otago Regional Land Transport Strategy
#5       Otago Regional Public Transport Plan 2014
#6       Otago Southland Regional Land Transport Plans 2015–2021
Local / City level policy documents:
#7       Dunedin City Council District Plan
#8       Dunedin towards 2050: Spatial plan for Dunedin
#9       The Dunedin City Integrated Transport Strategy
#10      Dunedin Second Generation Plan



Table 5
Qualitative analysis of the interviews with policy-makers.
Theme                                             Sub-theme (no. of references)


Barriers and enablers to use public transport     Cost of bus service (11)
to school                                     Safety (14)
Providing for the transport
disadvantaged (6)
Travel practices (6)
Time and convenience (6)
Issues of the current system and for              Collaboration (15)
developing an effective transport policy      Providing for the transport
disadvantaged (6)
Planning documents (6)
Public bus compared to school

bus (8)
Role of policy for increasing public transport    Transport policies (9)
use                                           Future planning (11)


surprising that many students voiced their concerns of selecting the

right bus for their needs, or missing their required stop and conse­
quently alighting in an unfamiliar environment. As a result, the bus was

identified as a last resort – an option if all else failed. This means that
students are travelling by bus at a time of stress and/or pressure, thus

intensifying the experiences of uncertainty and time constraint.
Adolescents identified the bus, and those who travelled by bus, in

terms of the ‘loser cruiser’, which may underpin a concern of using this
mode, and of being associated with regular bus clients. This was ar­

ticulated by a bus survey participant who said that buses “smell, [are]
filled with weirdos and strange people who can’t afford a car”. However,

some students developed coping strategies to make their experience on
the bus more pleasant, and quicker, for instance by taking an earlier,

less crowded bus. A student focus group participant stated that “There is
a difference between catching the 7:20 bus and the 7:30 bus. The 7:20 bus

will get you here about 7:30–7:35, whereas the 7:30 bus will get you here at
like 8:00; because it’s stopping and starting. It gets busier and it takes so

long, which is why I prefer going early” [student, focus group 8].

3.4. Policy analysis

Among the ten analysed policy documents, six explicitly discussed
transport to school (#2, #4, #5, #6, #8, #9, Table 4); two considered
public health from a transport perspective (#3, #8); and one ap­
proached public health from a physical activity perspective (#9)
(Copland, 2017). Four documents placed an emphasis on transport di­
versity: providing for both young, physically active people and elderly
or mobility-impaired transport-disadvantaged people (#4, #6, #8, #9).
Car dependence and the ways it manifests as an issue at different scales
was mentioned in several local documents but few documents explicitly
discussed how car dependence can be addressed. One document (#5)


Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58




Year         Reference


2003         (Land Transport Management Act 2003, 2003)
transport      2013         (New Zealand Transport Agency, 2013)

2015         (New Zealand Government, 2015)

2011         (Otago Regional Council, 2011)
2014         (Otago Regional Council, 2014)
2015–2021    (Otago Regional Council and Environment Southland, 2015)

2006         (Dunedin   City   Council,   2006)
2012         (Dunedin   City   Council,   2012)
2013         (Dunedin   City   Council,   2013)
2017         (Dunedin   City   Council,   2017)



identified greater use of public transport to school by adolescents as a
desirable goal. Yet public health was neither prioritised nor legislated

for in transport planning in New Zealand at that time, which focused
then on growth and viability. Dunedin appeared as an exception, as
strategic planning documents (e.g. #9) refereed to the intersections
between transport and public health.



3.5. Interviews with policy-makers in Dunedin

Three themes emerged from analysing interviews with policy-ma­
kers, relating to: barriers and enablers for using public transport; issues


of the current transport system and for developing an effective trans­
port policy; and the role of policy for increasing public transport use
(Table 5).
Policy-makers noted the roles of pricing strategies and the cost of
using public transport as a potential barrier to bus uptake, and this is
understood in relation to – or competition with - other modes such as

private car. As the capital and annual fixed costs of car ownership are
often not directly considered by private vehicle drivers on a day-to-day

basis, the cost of bus transport needs to compete with the daily mar­
ginal costs of driving, such as parking and petrol. A DCC participant

reflected upon this, noting how “It’s actually very expensive to own a car,
but people don’t perceive it to be that way. You’ve got to keep it on the road,

and gas, and tyres and all that sort of thing”.
The pricing structure of bus transport was also seen in relation to

wider transport policies. For instance, in Queenstown, a town in the
Otago region, New Zealand, for which the ORC also plays a role in

transport planning, parking revenue directly supports subsidising the
bus system, thus allowing lower prices for the public bus compared

with other places in the country, such as Dunedin. An ORC participant
noted that “if we did something similar with the Dunedin City Council and

their parking revenue, we could introduce more competitive fares”, both
suggesting a possibility for reducing the cost of bus transport, but also

understanding the connections between private and public transport at
the policy level. A change in policy through “…car-parking charges or
road pricing might get the parents to change their behaviour” [DCC re­
spondent].
The public buses are often used by students to travel to school, yet
these operate separately – with different management and pricing
structures – from school buses. While traditionally students used dedi­
cated school buses, participants noted how changes in the national
policy was increasing the number of students using public buses, which
means that “[transport to school is] becoming more a part of our remit as a
council” (ORC respondent) and thus, “[the ORC] have made a decision in
their Regional Public Transport Plan that there isn’t really a need to fund
separate school services for kids, they can use the new (public) network”.
This raises questions about the suitability of their network for school
transport, the public/student mix, but also funding the public network

53

J.S. Mindell, et al.                                                                                                                          Travel Behaviour and Society 22


Table 6
Barriers to public bus use in Dunedin as reported by secondary school students.
Total sample n = 1391           Bus users (n = 850)     Not bus users (n = 541)
(% agree)                       (% agree)               (% agree)

Cost
It's cheaper to travel by car with friends or family                                      57%                             54%                     61%
I often don't have enough money for the bus fare                                          32%                             35%                     28%
I'm not able to pay the fare by mobile phone                                              21%                             21%                     21%
Choice of travel
My parents always take me where I want to go                                              49%                             42%                     60%
Because I have a long way to go, I'd rather go by car                                     47%                             43%                     53%
I'd rather walk or bike the whole way                                                     33%                             27%                     44%
I don't have anyone to go with and don't want to travel alone                             26%                             22%                     34%
I have my own car and don't need to go by bus                                             21%                             17%                     27%
The bus trip
The bus service is too slow                                                               44%                             42%                     46%
I am scared the bus will be delayed and I'll be late for school/ the event I'm going to   28%                             29%                     27%
Frequency of buses
There aren't enough bus services at weekends                                              44%                             51%                     33%
There aren't enough services at the times I want to travel                                43%                             48%                     36%
The timetable does not suit school/event start of finish times                            35%                             37%                     31%
I would have to change buses to get to the places I want to go                            31%                             33%                     28%
Bus stops
I don't like waiting at the bus stop, it's cold and wet                                   35%                             35%                     36%
It's too far or too difficult to walk to the bus stop from my home                        20%                             19%                     22%
I don't like waiting at the bus stop, it's scary                                          15%                             13%                     19%
I have to cross a busy street to get to the bus stop                                      9%                              7%                      12%
Using the bus timetable
I don't know the bus timetable for the places I want to visit                             41%                             36%                     48%
I don't know the bus times for the area I live in                                         35%                             27%                     49%
I can't understand the bus timetable                                                      20%                             15%                     27%
My parents haven't explained to me how to use the bus timetable                           13%                             9%                      19%

Source: Otago School Students Lifestyle Survey 2009.
Notes: The response options were ‘yes’ and ‘no’, with ‘yes’ responses being reported as ‘% agree’.
The five most common ‘other’ responses included unfriendly bus drivers, distrust of other passengers and fears for safety, fears of getting on the wrong bus or off at
the wrong stop, and receiving no help from bus drivers, parents that do not trust the service, or other people, and would not let their children use it, and dislike of
sitting next to unfriendly unfamiliar people.

and the complex entanglement of and less than streamlined involve­                               healthcare and treating illness, rather than about maintaining good
ment of different agencies in providing bus services. One participant                            mental and physical health. The decisions made by the local and re­
argued:                                                                                          gional councils do not relate to public health objectives but are focused
on accessibility and safety, with one participant noting that “I think
“I think one of the areas you would conjure with is the division of
traditionally public health hasn’t had a lot of influence on decision-making.
responsibility between the Ministry of Education providing buses to
… most of my professional career we’ve been very focused on doing no harm,
school, and the public bus system (run by the ORC) to support kids
so safety’s been really important, so that’s driven down kids walking and
to school, there is sort of two views aren’t there? I.e. we don’t want
cycling to school” [DCC respondent]. At the regional scale this point was
children polluting our normal [public] buses, but equally, I per­
also made, with a participant noting how:
sonally think that they could be a very useful sort of revenue to
support the public bus service” [DCC respondent]                                                “[the link between physical activity and public transport is] not
[emphasised in the Otago Regional Public Transport Plan], I mean I
It was clear that Dunedin policy-makers thought that health is about
don’t really know how we would incorporate it, because the plan is

Table 7
Barriers to public bus use in Dunedin as reported by parents of secondary school students.
Total sample of     Parents of adolescents travelling to          Parents of adolescents not travelling to
parents             school by bus (n = 32)                        school by bus (n = 318)
(% agree)           (% agree)                                     (% agree)

My child has other activities before or after school           65%                 59%                                           66%
I am already taking the car out, so it is more convenient to   59%                 25%                                           62%
drive my child
The bus is too expensive                                       45%                 50%                                           45%
The bus trip takes too long                                    28%                 19%                                           29%
The buses do not have bike racks for use free of charge        26%                 25%                                           27%
We live too close to school                                    19%                 0%                                            22%
The bus stop is too far from home                              15%                 3%                                            17%
I am concerned that my child could be bullied on the bus       7%                  3%                                            8%
I believe it is unsafe for my child to walk to the bus stop    8%                  3%                                            9%
I believe it is unsafe for my child to wait at the bus stop    6%                  0%                                            7%

Source: BEATS Parental Survey 2014–2017.
Note: Responses were collected using a 4-point Likert scale ranging from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’. Data for ‘% agree’ represents the sum of ‘strongly
agree’ into ‘agree’ responses.

54
(2021) 48–58




p-value



0.015
0.006
0.888

< 0.001
0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001

0.226
0.301

< 0.001
< 0.001
0.013
0.063

0.532
0.166
0.003
0.002

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001





























p-value



0.450
< 0.001

0.562
0.235
0.855
0.004
0.043
0.355
0.265
0.124







J.S. Mindell, et al.


sort of a ‘cover all’ type policy, and yeah we just have a lot of elderly
and disabled, so it’s like trying to provide for two polar opposites”
[ORC respondent]

Changes to young people’s behaviours and practices, particularly at

the intersection of technological innovation were identified as potential

opportunities for incentivising bus travel. For instance, a participant

from the NZTA noted: “You don’t want kids waiting for ages for a bus at a

bus stop because there’s a perceived danger that people have. So, with

technology, it can be ‘just in time’ type stuff, so that kids can get to the stop,

the services are there and they can see where the bus is.” This can mean that

the perceived safety of bus transport increases. As well as safety ben­

efits, real-time information on smart devices was thought to make bus

transport more appealing by offering accurate information on-the-go,

an NZTA participant argued “anything on a smartphone is definitely more

attractive to teenagers” [ORC Respondent]. Such real-time information

could reduce uncertainty; reduce waiting times by facilitating users’

appropriate arrival times at the bus stop; make bus use easier; and be an

efficient method for easy payment.

Such technologies also have the potential to offer better integration

between modes, so that bus transport is no longer seen in isolation from

other modes, such as active modes (walking, cycling) but also con­

nectivity between types of public transport, taxi-hubs and more. An

NZTA participant noted how “a key role for us is working towards really

good integrated transport solutions as part of a whole system. So we are

much more into the system thinking now… you can’t just think of it as once

they [students] are on the bus they are done with […] So we’ve got to look at

opportunities for people to maybe get off the bus and jump on the bike to get

home, and then you know, it’s just making the whole thing more convenient

and just giving more opportunities and choice really”.


4. Discussion

4.1. Barriers to school travel by public bus

Most adolescents in Dunedin did not travel to school by bus. This
trend differs from cities such as Vienna where most high school students
travel by bus. However this is not to suggest that the bus is the preferred
mode, as more than 80% of those Viennese bus users reported a pre­
ference for a different transport mode (Stark et al., 2019). Fig. 2 sum­
marises the major barriers to Dunedin adolescents using public bus
transport to school: distance from home to school, cost, parental trip
chaining, built environment features, the weather, the convenience of




Fig. 2. Common barriers to using public


55
Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58


car-based travel, the public bus services, including their infrastructure
and information, and safety concerns. Although a study of Hong Kong
adolescents found that perceived distance to public transport stops was
a significant factor influencing active travel in boys (Barnett et al.,

2019), distance to the bus stop was relevant in our study only when

there was no service that came to that locale. In line with studies

elsewhere (Berggren et al., 2019), waiting times and unpredictability of

service were also significant factors in determining positive perceptions

and use of public transport to school. Nevertheless, it is important to

note that Fan and colleagues highlighted how transit users generally

overestimate the time spent waiting but the presence of amenities, in­

cluding benches and shelters, ameliorated this (Fan et al., 2016). This

suggests that perceived wait times may be exaggerated, and highlights

the important role infrastructure plays in overcoming these barriers.

The norm of families dropping off and picking up their children by

private car is consistent with the preference for car-based travel among

Dunedin adolescents (Hopkins et al., 2019). This leads to two important

policy considerations. First, inflexibility of workplace has meant a home

office option is rare; inflexibility of working hours precludes different

start times that would allow different transport options, such as the bus,

for both adolescents and their parents. Recent experiences of home-

working during the COVID-19 pandemic may, however, change atti­

tudes to home-working as a feasible option for office-based workers on

some, if not all, workdays or more flexible start and end times that suit

families’ needs better.

Skarin and colleagues pointed out the multiple ways in which

household members affect each other’s travel and recommended

focussing on household context, not just individual travel behaviours

(Skarin et al., 2017), and this is important here too. One fundamental

issue is that of choice of school, which is both influenced by household
resources and affects travel distances required and modes used (Jarvis
and Alvanides, 2008; Mandic et al., 2017b; Sandretto et al., 2020).
Secondly, the idea that good parents show their care for their off­
spring through chauffeuring them around needs to be altered and so­
cially sanctioned. This is particularly important given that parents play
a critical role in decision-making about adolescents’ mode of travel to
school (Mandic et al., 2020b). Instead, the benefits of using public
transport for adolescents’ independence and health (Goodman et al.,
2014) needs to be emphasised and be positioned at the centre of dis­
cussion, along with emphasising to adolescents the environmental im­
pacts of their travel mode, as has been explored in Denmark (Møller
et al., 2018).





buses for transport to school.




J.S. Mindell, et al.


One encouraging aspect was the willingness of all 12 school prin­
cipals for their school and themselves to be included in this research.
This is important, given findings in Canada that lack of involvement of
principals (and parents and students) was a key barrier to implementing
a school travel plan effectively (Mammen et al., 2015). Thus, it becomes
clear that a multi-actor and multi-institution (including government
agencies) response to shift attitudes and increase the adoption of active
and public transport modes is required, which takes into account the
relations between actors and institutions.
From the findings of this research, a number of policy re­
commendations emerged (Copland, 2017; Copland et al., 2017) to en­
courage Dunedin adolescents’ use of public buses for school travel.
Policy recommendations for both city and regional councils focused on
financial aspects, weather, safety and user needs. Additional city- and
region-specific recommendations were also outlined in the report pre­
pared for the city and regional councils (Copland et al., 2017). It is clear
from the research that there is potential for cities to learn from one
another. Literature on urban policy mobilities (e.g. McCann, 2011) has
often focused on large cities, and between countries. However, our data
suggest there may be much for small cities to learn from one another
within one country.

4.2. Changes to policies over time

Analysis of the policy documents revealed that economic growth
and efficiency but not public health were the key considerations in
transport policy in the period to 2017. The exceptions were the strategic
planning documents for Dunedin, in which the effects of transport
choice on the public’s health was mentioned. There were also con­
flicting aims regarding public health. After this policy analysis was
conducted, a change of government and of national priorities for
transport in New Zealand occurred, with different outcomes prioritised,
including inclusive access, healthy and safe people, and environmental
sustainability (New Zealand Ministry of Transport, 2019).
The Land Transport Management Act (New Zealand Government,
2003) mandated regional government to plan for ‘transport-dis­
advantaged’ people; which in Dunedin results in bus stops being a
maximum of 400 m apart (in areas with bus routes). While this is
beneficial in reducing inequalities in access, it minimises the amount of
physical activity adolescents would obtain from walking or cycling to
and from bus stops to levels unlikely to contribute to their health
(Duncan et al., 2016). Nonetheless, the free bus travel scheme for young
people in London has encouraged greater use of bus transport for short
trips without significant impact on adolescents’ overall active travel
(Green et al., 2014), even when bus stops are in close proximity.
Policy-makers felt that enticing adolescents to use public transport
for school travel is challenging in a society with an embedded car
culture. However, interviews with policy-makers suggested a slow but
positive change, with new investment in Dunedin’s public bus network
and real-time information technology, at bus stops or using apps, to
increase the user-friendliness of public transport and address some of
the barriers mentioned by students, parents and school principals. Cats
and Loutos found that although apps underestimate waiting times, they
were much more accurate than timetables (Cats and Loutos, 2016).
Alternative ways of funding public transport were also being explored
by policy-makers such as a flat rate for young people. In London, the
provision of free bus travel to adolescents had increased bus use and
decreased travel poverty (Jones et al., 2012).
The findings from our study were used to develop a set of re­
commendations to inform policy-makers (Copland et al., 2017). Policy
documents published in the past two years have shown some shift. The
updated Otago Regional Transport Plan (2018), for the first-time, links
public health concerns and transport. The 2017 NZTA update of gui­
dance on preparing regional transport policies focuses on public
transport (New Zealand Transport Agency, 2017). The 2018 version of
the Government Statement on Land Transport recommends the


Travel Behaviour and Society 22 (2021) 48–58


importance of mode shift from private vehicle travel, particularly in
urban areas, and commits to increasing funding for walking, cycling,
public transport and road policing (New Zealand Government, 2018).
The strategic direction includes commitments to ‘mode-neutrality’ (i.e.
considering all modes), reversing the previous assumptions favouring
private cars, and to reducing greenhouse gas and adverse effects on the
local environment and public health. The updated Otago and Southland
Regional Land Transport Plan (Otago Regional Council and
Environment Southland Regional Council, 2018) has a focus on eco­
nomic growth but also commits to improving both public transport and
safe walking and cycling linkages (including creating a network of cycle
trails in southern New Zealand), as well as actions to reduce serious
road travel injuries and deaths. In addition, recent policy re­
commendations for increasing active transport in New Zealand also
recommend improving public transport (Mandic et al., 2019, 2020a).
Since transport contributes about 40% of New Zealand’s carbon emis­
sions (Statistics New Zealand, 2019), the government will need to de­
velop a strategy with clear goals related to modal shift to achieve the
goals set in the recently approved Carbon Zero Act (New Zealand
Government, 2019).

4.3. Strengths and limitations of the studies

Strengths of this study include the multiple sets of data in one city.
The use of a comprehensive set of both qualitative and quantitative data
provides insights on perspectives of potential public bus use from
adolescents, parents, secondary school teachers, principals and policy-
makers and allows integration of those insights for a specific geographic
context.
Limitations include analysis of data gathered in only one city, which
limits generalisability of findings to other cities in New Zealand or in­
ternationally. However, that applies to many other studies of travel.
Importantly, our findings are very similar to those of studies elsewhere.
Also, we used data collected over an 8-year period. However, the rates
of adolescents using bus to school in Dunedin remained unchanged
between 2009 (22%; presented in the study) and 2014/2015 (21%)
(Mandic et al., 2015a,b).

5. Conclusions

Major barriers to Dunedin adolescents using public bus transport to
school included distance from home to school, cost, parental trip
chaining, built environment features, the weather, the convenience of
car-based travel, and safety concerns. If the goal is to increase public
transport use for adolescents’ school-related travel, effective policies
could include: increasing parking prices to discourage driving and trip-
chaining for parents; improving bus infrastructure and subsidies; and by
changing bus/bus users’ perceptions (Copland, 2017; Copland et al.,
2017). These initiatives will require collaboration between different
government authorities. A policy for public bus use by secondary school
students should be developed to address parental, adolescents’ and
schools’ concerns and encourage collaborations between government
authorities and schools.

6. Data statement

All policy documents reviewed for this study are publicly available.
Survey, focus groups and interview data used in data analysis for this
project will not be shared due to sensitivity of the collected data as well
as participants having been given assurances that the collected data will
not be shared.

Funding

The BEATS Study was funded by the Health Research Council of
New Zealand (14/565), National Heart Foundation of New Zealand

56
