

Examining Long-Term Impact of
California Safe Routes to School Program
Ten Years Later

David R. Ragland, Swati Pande, John Bigham, and Jill F. Cooper

California was the first state to legislate a Safe Routes to School (SR2S)
program under Assembly Bill 1475 (1999). SR2S funds construction
projects that make it safer for children to walk or bicycle to school and
encourages a greater number of children to choose these modes of travel
for the school commute. The main goal of this project was to assess the
long-term impact of program-funded engineering modifications on walk-
ing and bicycling levels and safety. Improvements were evaluated with
a targeted method to determine the countermeasures that resulted in
safety and mode shift. The major results indicated that the safety of
pedestrians increased within 250 ft of an infrastructure improvement,
such as a sidewalk. There was also evidence of mode shift near improve-
ments. Positive results for safety and mobility, as well as improved data
collection for funded programs, should make SR2S programs competitive
among other transportation needs.


For more than 10 years, efforts to encourage children to walk and
bicycle to school have attracted concerted programmatic and policy
attention to address the issues of physical inactivity and pedes-
trian injury risk around schools and in local communities in the
United States (1). In 1969, 42% of U.S. schoolchildren aged five to
eighteen walked or bicycled to school. By 2009, this number had
declined to 12.7% (2).
A 2008 report from the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion investigating why more children do not walk to school found

traffic safety to be the second most common barrier (3). Overall,

children are involved in about one-third of all pedestrian-vehicle

crashes (4). Children aged 5 to 15 years bicycle more than any other

age group. In 2011, children under the age of 16 years comprised

21% of those injured and 11% of those killed in a bicycle crash (5).

Research on the barriers and opportunities to walk and bicy-

cle to school has consistently found that distance between home
and school is a primary factor influencing how children travel to
school (3, 6–17). A study of 16 California elementary schools
participating in the California Safe Routes to School (SRTS) proj-
ect found that children who lived within a mile of school were
three times more likely to walk to school than to travel by private
vehicle (12).

Safe Transportation Research and Education Center, University of California,
Berkeley, 2614 Dwight Way—7374, Berkeley, CA 94720-7374. Corresponding
author: S. Pande, spande@berkeley.edu.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 2464, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,

D.C., 2014, pp. 86–92.
DOI: 10.3141/2464-11









Engineering-related factors that increase pedestrian and bicycle
safety may also influence walking and bicycling to school. Separa-
tion of pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicles onto different ele-
ments of the transportation system is a possible area of engineering
modifications. For example, modifications could involve provid-
ing sidewalks, bike lanes, and bike paths. Conflict points between
pedestrians and bicyclists and motor vehicles could be reduced by
providing marked crosswalks and crossings at traffic lights, altering
signal timing so there is a pedestrian-only phase, and reducing traf-
fic volumes and speeds around schools. A study of 19 elementary
schools in Australia found that children were less likely to walk or
bicycle to school if they had to travel along a roadway with busy
traffic and no lights or crossing points (14). At three elementary
schools in California, parents reported a 38% increase in how often
children walked to school after an SRTS sidewalk improvement was
completed (18).
Safe Routes to School (SR2S) is a program that was initially devel-
oped in Odense, Denmark, in the 1970s after studies revealed that
Denmark had the highest child pedestrian collision rate in Europe.
The Odense program created a series of engineering improvements
to reduce safety hazards. Ten years after implementation, child pedes-
trian casualties had decreased by more than 80% (19). The first pro-
gram in the United States was initiated in 1994 in the Bronx, New
York. Like the Odense program, this community SR2S program
focused primarily on reduction of pedestrian injury and death through
engineering improvements.

In 1999, California became the first state to pass legislation for a

state-level program, which allocated federal transportation funds for

engineering modifications near schools. The goals of the policy are to

increase walking and bicycling activity among students at elementary,

middle, and high schools and to reduce child and adolescent injuries

and fatalities. The dual program goals are key: focusing on safety as
well as mobility means that broader public health goals can be attained
compared with just focusing on mobility or safety alone. Subse-
quently, federal funds were made available to schools through the
SR2S project allocated by the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient
Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (2009), the transpor-
tation authorization in place between 2005 and 2010. The acronym
of the federal program, SRTS, will be used throughout the rest of
this paper for the sake of clarity.
The California program provides funding to municipalities for
engineering modifications such as sidewalks, crosswalk placement
and painting, traffic lights, and speed humps near schools. The munic-
ipality is required to provide a minimum of 10% in local matching


funds. From its inception in 1999 to the end of 2006, the California
SRTS program funded 570 projects with a total cost of more than
$190 million. The projects were equitably distributed across the


86

Ragland, Pande, Bigham, and Cooper


state, with proportional representation achieved geographically and
by population (20). The California legislature has reauthorized the
program three times over the past decade.
The original California legislation included mandates for two
periods of evaluation to measure any changes in mobility and safety.
A research team from the University of California (UC), Irvine, con-
ducted the first study, which focused on the impact of the program
on levels of walking and bicycling to school and traffic safety char-
acteristics (e.g., vehicle speeds, yielding, and pedestrian and bicy-
clist travel patterns) near schools (21, 22). In the second evaluation,
a research team from the UC Berkeley examined the effectiveness
of the program in reducing crashes, injuries, and fatalities involving

children in the vicinity of the projects (20).

The UC Irvine evaluation collected pre- and post-construction
data at 10 schools and found increased rates of walking and bicy-
cling to school after the engineering modification was completed

near a school, particularly when the modification was along a child’s
chosen route to school. In addition, the evaluation found that traffic
safety conditions improved at several schools. For example, children
were walking on a newly constructed sidewalk rather than the shoul-
der of the roadway, and yielding rates of motor vehicles to pedestri-
ans and bicyclists at intersections improved after the installation of
a traffic signal (21, 22).
The UC Berkeley evaluation, which examined 125 California SRTS
projects funded between 2000 and 2005, found an overall decline in
the number of child pedestrian and bicyclist injuries in the SRTS proj-
ect areas, the study control areas, and in California as a whole, con-
sistent with national data. However, when compared with the control
areas, the SRTS project areas did not show a greater decline in the
number of injuries. But once increases in walking rates were taken
into account in the project areas, the California program did suggest
a decreased rate of injury and a net benefit in terms of safety for the
affected students. Other reported safety benefits included reductions
in near misses, increased perceptions of safety, less vehicle traffic,
and improved driver and pedestrian behavior (20).


Evaluation Methodology
and Major Findings

The present study was conducted with a grant from the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation Active Living Research Program. Researchers
from UC Berkeley updated the safety study (20), and two members
of the original UC Irvine research team conducted the mobility study
(21, 22). Forty-seven schools throughout California were included
in the safety study, and nine schools from southern California were
included in the mobility study.
The goals of the SRTS evaluation were to

1. Assess the long-term impact of safety around schools that
have implemented SRTS-funded infrastructure improvements around
schools and
2. Assess the long-term impact of SRTS-funded engineering
modifications on walking and bicycling activity.

The focus of this research was to develop analyses that were
location-specific, that is, to look at safety and mobility near specific
SRTS infrastructure improvements. Overall, the method that was
used provided a model for future evaluation research. The method-
ology and major findings are described separately below for safety
and mobility.
87


Safety Study

Methodology

The safety analysis was based on a comparison of school areas that
were affected by SRTS projects (school areas) and nearby areas that
were unlikely to be affected by the SRTS improvements (control
areas). For the school areas and the control areas, the change in the
number of collisions was compared for the period before the SRTS
construction took place (preconstruction) and the period after the
SRTS construction was completed (postconstruction). This location-
based analysis required compiling data from several sources: agen-
cies, schools, and the location of SRTS funded countermeasures and

collision data.



Program Data

Data on funded agencies were available from the California Depart-
ment of Transportation SRTS website. Follow-up contacts with
individual agencies provided information on the schools affected by
the project, locations of constructed countermeasures, and construc-
tion start and end dates. The study contacted 313 agencies through
e-mail and 93 agencies responded to the request for data.


School Data

Program data were available at the agency level. An SRTS program
can affect one or multiple schools. Each school listed in an agency’s
application was matched to the California Department of Educa-
tion’s database of public schools. The database contains information
on each school on enrollment, grade level, opening dates, latitude
and longitude coordinates, and other factors. Each school is assigned
a County-District-School code, which was used as a unique identifier
to match all schools used in the analysis.


Countermeasure Data

A funded project at a school site can list zero, one, or multiple
countermeasures. For example, an SRTS project could fund the
construction of sidewalks, curb ramps, and radar speed feedback
signs for a school. One countermeasure could affect multiple
schools. For example, a project could fund the construction of a
sidewalk expansion that would affect two schools that are close
to each other. Some project data did not specify the location of the
countermeasure.
Countermeasures were classified as being located either at an
intersection or along a corridor. A countermeasure data set was
created that had one record per countermeasure per school. The
data set was then geocoded with a combination of ArcGIS soft-
ware and Google Maps. Intersections were batch-geocoded with
ArcGIS 10 and Streetmap North America. Corridors were initially
created with Google My Maps by tracing the roadway between the
specified start and end points. The corridors were then imported
into ArcGIS software. A buffer of 250 ft (76.2 m) was created
around each countermeasure. Previous research by the Florida
Department of Transportation and FHWA used the same buffer mea-
surement (23, 24). It was determined that collisions within 250 ft of
a countermeasure could reasonably be expected to be affected by
the countermeasure.

88


When available, the expected effectiveness of SRTS infrastruc-
ture improvements was gauged by consulting the FHWA guide for
crash reduction factors (CRFs). Table 1 summarizes the CRFs for
the countermeasures in the final data set. The CRF is a number giv-
ing the expected percentage reduction in collisions for a particular
countermeasure. For example, among the set of infrastructure
countermeasures identified in this study, the countermeasure with

the highest CRF was to install sidewalk (to avoid walking along

roadway), with CRF = 74 (Table 1). CRF = 74 means that there

is a 74% expected reduction in pedestrian-involved collisions for that

countermeasure. It was expected that countermeasures with high CRFs

would yield a safety benefit. With this evaluation, the purpose of apply-

ing CRFs was to determine whether, a priori, the installed infrastructure

improvements had a demonstrated effectiveness based on previous sys-

tematic studies. The data set of geocoded countermeasure buffer zones

included 25 corridors and 50 intersections.


Preconstruction and Postconstruction Dates

Each program area was assigned a preconstruction period and a post-
construction period. The assignment was based on the construction
start and end dates provided by the agencies. The preconstruction
start date was designated as the later date of the date the school

opened or 48 months before the end date. The preconstruction end

date was the reported date that construction started. The start date

for the postconstruction period was the reported date of construction

completion. The end date was selected as the earliest of 48 months

after the start date, the date the school closed, or December 31, 2009.


Collision Data

Collision data were obtained from the California Statewide Integrated
Traffic Records System (SWITRS) (25). SWITRS is a database of
police-reported collisions maintained by the California Highway
Patrol. The collisions were subsequently geocoded and then made
accessible to researchers through the Transportation Injury Mapping
System (26). SWITRS injury and fatality data were obtained from

Transportation Injury Mapping System for the period from January 1,




TABLE 1   Countermeasures and Crash Reduction Factors
in Data Set

Countermeasure                                           Count      CRF

Install sidewalk (to avoid walking along roadway)         25         74
Install traffic signal                                    11         38
Install dynamic advance intersection warning system        2         70

Install flashing beacons as advance warning                1         30

Replace existing “Walk–Don’t Walk” signals with            2         52
pedestrian countdown signal heads
Install speed humps                                         3        50
Install changeable speed warning signs for individual       4        46
drivers
Improve superelevation (for drainage)                      7         45
Total countermeasures                                     55         na

Note: na = not applicable.
Transportation Research Record 2464


1998, through December 31, 2009. Pedestrian- or bicycle-involved
collisions occurring between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. from September
through May were selected for the analysis.


Data Set of Localized Collisions

Collisions occurring within 250-ft countermeasure buffer zones

(program areas) or quarter-mile school buffer zones (control areas)

were selected for the statistical analysis. A binary variable was cre-

ated that described location: either within the improvement zone

(program area) or outside the improvement zone (control area).

A numeric code (1 through 75) was used to stratify the sample

by school. The code represented 150 program and control areas

around 75 constructed countermeasures. Of the countermeasures,

32 were intersection based and 15 were corridor based. The counter­

measures were localized to 47 schools; the breakdown of schools
within the sample is presented in Table 2. A school could appear
multiple times in the data set if multiple countermeasures were
constructed around it.


Analysis

Random-intercept Poisson and random-intercept negative bino-

mial regression models were applied to the data, with the methods

discussed in Diggle et al. (27), Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal (28),

and Rothman et al. (29). The Stata statistical software package

was used for all data management and analysis procedures and the

generalized linear latent and mixed models procedure was used to
implement the models (30). A Huber-White sandwich estimator of
the variance-covariance matrix was specified to protect against vio-
lations of distributional assumptions. Overdispersion is a common
problem with Poisson regression. The random intercept and the
robust variance estimator were used to address the overdispersion.


Major Findings

Mapping the locations made the following points clear: (a) on aver-

age, the intersections were within 0.23 mi (0.37 km) of the nearest
school and (b) collisions were often situated in locations that were
unlikely to be affected by the SRTS infrastructure improvements
(Figure 1).




TABLE 2   Schools in Data Set

Grade Served               Number of Schools

Kindergarten–Grade 4               1

Kindergarten–Grade 5              24

Kindergarten–Grade 6              11
Kindergarten–Grade 7               1
Kindergarten–Grade 8               2
6–8                                4
6–9                                1
9–12                               3
Total                             47


Ragland, Pande, Bigham, and Cooper































FIGURE 1   Sample SRTS injury collision and SRTS countermeasure
map, Los Angeles, California.




The analysis focused on changes in the numbers of injury col-
lisions that occurred within 250 ft of the funded countermea-
sure. The injury collisions were then compared with changes in

the numbers of injury collisions that occurred beyond 250 ft of
the countermeasures but within a quarter mile of the school. This
approach was based on the assumption that countermeasures
would affect pedestrian and bicyclist safety closest to the instal-
lation location of the countermeasure. Countermeasures would
not be expected to affect pedestrians or bicyclists arriving outside
the range of the countermeasure. For example, if a sidewalk was
built on the east side of a school, those living on the west side
would not be expected to benefit from it on the trip to school. The
analysis was conducted twice: first, for pedestrians and bicyclists
ages 5 to 18 years and, second, for pedestrians and bicyclists of
all ages.

The first analysis, which used collisions involving pedestrians
and bicyclists ages 5 to 18 years, found an incident rate ratio (IRR)
of 0.47 (Table 3). This IRR corresponded to a 50% reduction in col-
lisions in the treatment area (within 250 ft of the countermeasure) in
relation to the area outside the treatment area. However, the effect
did not reach the statistically significant level of 0.05. The patterns
for subcategories of injuries were similar.
The second analysis used collisions involving pedestrians and
bicyclists of all ages (Table 4). The analysis found an IRR of 0.26,
corresponding to a collision reduction of about 75%. This result was
statistically significant (p = .003). The pattern was similar for most

of the collision subcategories, such as fatalities, serious injuries, and
89


TABLE 3   IRRs for Program Effect, Analysis 1

95%
Confidence
Level

Collision Characteristic      IRR           LL      UL     p

Total                         0.47          0.20    1.12   .09
Fatal or severe injury        0.35          0.03    3.63   .38
Minor injury                  0.68          0.34    1.39   .29
Morning (6–9 a.m.)            0.59          0.17    2.10   .42
Afternoon (3–6 p.m.)          0.45          0.10    2.00   .30
Elementary                    0.44          0.14    1.39   .16
Middle                        0.93          0.23    3.70   .91
High school                   0.15          0.01    1.84   .14

Note: LL = lower limit; UL = upper limit.




minor injuries. Although the primary rationale for the SRTS program
is to increase safety for students on their way to and from school,
countermeasures for increasing safety for students also improve
safety for pedestrians and bicyclists of all ages.
The strengths of the analysis were the high case ascertainment,
through the use of police-reported collisions in SWITRS, and the
comparison of pre- and postcollisions within the distance of counter-
measure impact. The safety portion of the study involved the devel-

opment of analyses that were more appropriate for the specific
location-based SRTS infrastructure improvements in comparison
with the schoolwide analyses that were conducted in a previous
study (20).



Mode Shift Study

The study also measured the impact of 10 years of the SRTS program
in California on walking and bicycling and whether infrastructure
improvements funded through the program encouraged children to
walk to school. A parent survey form developed by the National



TABLE 4   IRRs for Program Effect, Analysis 2

95%
Confidence
Level

Collision Characteristic      IRR        LL          UL     p

Total                         0.26       0.11        0.63   .003
Fatal or severe injury        0.15       0.01        1.85   .14
Minor injury                  0.27       0.12        0.63   .003
Morning (6–9 a.m.)            0.56       0.17        1.87   .34
Afternoon (3–6 p.m.)          0.09       0.02        0.45   .004
Elementary                    0.36       0.13        1.09   .05
Middle                        0.15       0.02        1.42   .10

High school                   0.12       0.02        0.76   .02


90


Center for Safe Routes to School was used to collect data on mobility
and determine reported barriers to walking to school (31). The sur-
vey was administered at eight of the original 16 schools that partici-
pated in earlier evaluations of SRTS. Participating schools distributed
the parent survey forms to all students. A total of 1,999 forms were
returned from the eight schools.
The parent surveys indicated the distance and travel mode to
school. The surveys also indicated the nearest intersection to the
family residence. The research team identified and geocoded SRTS
funded countermeasures near each of the eight schools. The inter-
section information from the parent surveys was geocoded and the
distance between the household and the SRTS countermeasure was
calculated. The probability of walking to school was compared for
households within 250 ft of the countermeasure versus households
farther than 250 ft but less than a quarter mile from the school. The
analysis found that living within 250 ft of an SR2S project increased
the probability that a child walked to school (coefficient = 0.82,
Z-statistic = 2).


Parents’ Perceptions of Safety
of Walking and Bicycling

The parent surveys showed that parents generally agreed that walk-
ing and biking to school were beneficial to their children’s health, but
that there were significant barriers in terms of distance, built envi-
ronment, and risk. Noninfrastructural improvements that included
encouragement activities and adult supervision of children, such
as walking to school buses, crossing guards, and higher levels of
enforcement, showed positive effects in encouraging walking.


Implications for Evaluation of Safety
in Future SRTS Programs

Buffer Zones for Evaluation  It was observed that the installed
countermeasures were spatially limited and often located some dis-
tance from the school and therefore not expected to have an impact
on the entire area around the school. One of the most important con-
clusions was that changes to the infrastructure should be evaluated
in the area in which the countermeasure was expected to have an
impact. Previous analyses suggested the use of a much wider buffer
zone (21, 22). This breadth would be appropriate for programs that
included systemic approaches, such as education, enforcement, and
areawide speed limits, which might be expected to have an impact
on the entire area surrounding a school.

Data on Infrastructure Improvements   Data on the instal-
lation of infrastructure improvements are critical; however, this
information was only available for a subset of the funded proj-
ects. Systematic reporting on infrastructure improvements (type,
location, and so forth) should be a condition of funding for future
SRTS programs. The U.S. Government Accountability Office
discussed the importance of conducting program evaluation of
the federal SRTS program in its report on the implementation of
SRTS (32).

Time of Analysis  The initial analyses were conducted between
the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. from September through May. Counter­
measures would be expected to have a positive impact beyond this
time frame.
Transportation Research Record 2464


Age Range of Observations  The original analyses of mode shift
were limited to pedestrians and bicyclists ages 6 to 18 years; how-
ever, countermeasures would be expected to have a positive impact
beyond youth. Future analyses should also include pedestrians and
bicyclists of other ages and other time spans to assess the full impact
of the funded countermeasures.

Statistical Methods  The analyses conducted for a pre–post
evaluation of SRTS projects by necessity had a quasi-experimental
design, subject to bias by regression to the mean effects. To address
this, evaluators should collect sufficient data and conduct Bayesian
analyses to control, as much as possible, for regression to the mean
effects.


Limitations

The project encountered four major challenges:

1. In the case of the mobility analysis, despite a $1,000 incen-
tive to the school and repeated attempts to contact administrators,
only eight schools that fit the criteria for use in the analyses partici-
pated. To increase participation, the response deadline for schools
was extended and substantial outreach was undertaken to encourage
school participation.
2. The mobility analysis used self-reported data from the parent
survey to identify the location of the household from the constructed
countermeasure. Of the total 1,999 reported intersections from the
parent survey forms, 25% could not be geocoded. The intersections
were either incorrectly identified or actually parallel streets. Although
the regression found that children living closer to the countermeasure
were more likely to walk to school, the sample size was small: only
125 households. The mode to school was also self-reported in the
parent survey. This was not a good substitute for actual counts of the
modes by which children arrive at school.
3. In the case of the safety analysis, it was difficult to obtain
a strong response rate from the funded agencies (departments of
trans­portation and public works) for information on infrastructure
improvements, despite repeated e-mails and calls to each agency.
One reason for the lack of response may have been that the agen-
cies have a degree of turnover, which made it difficult to contact
the appropriate person to get information about the SRTS grants
written and the projects implemented. Although it was difficult to
reach many agencies, the local agencies that did respond were quite
helpful and the evaluation could not have been conducted without
their input.
4. It was apparent that participating agencies need to collect
more reliable and consistent data about the programs they fund.
Although the proposed funding information was available, it was
unclear without agency response whether the agencies actually
deployed the proposed improvements or selected others. Part of
the difficulty in evaluating the program was that the agencies were
under no obligation to report which improvements were actually
deployed. To improve evaluations in the future, agencies could
be required to pinpoint exact construction locations on a map.
Although the questionnaire could be modified to obtain this spe-
cific information, the data would still be limited to those agencies
that responded.

Further, the schools and improvements for which there were
available data may not have been representative of the entire pro-

Ragland, Pande, Bigham, and Cooper


gram. Another weakness, explored in further detail below, is the
possibility of a regression to the mean phenomenon influencing
the findings. Insofar as infrastructure locations are influenced by
the occurrence of crashes, that is, statistically high crash location,
a regression to the mean effect might result in reduced observed
crashes following countermeasure installation even if the counter-
measure had no impact. In other words, regression to the mean refers
to the fact that a crash at one intersection does not necessarily mean

there will be crashes there every year hence. Installing a counter­
measure may affect safety or it may have no effect since, regard-
less of the countermeasure, there may not be any more crashes at
that location. Statistical techniques, such as an empirical Bayes

approach, may be a partial remedy for correcting this potential bias.
Such an analysis was outside the scope of this study, given the data
involved, but the approach is recommended for future studies of
safety in SRTS programs.



Conclusions

SRTS programs hold much appeal as an effective way to increase
safety and walking or bicycling to school. Positive results for safety

and mobility, as well as improved data collection for funded pro-
grams, should make SRTS programs competitive among other
transportation needs. Understanding the potential for walking to
school can help in identifying appropriate countermeasures and

evaluating safety and mode shift.

Substantial funds have been allocated to SRTS programs across
the country. Although evaluations have measured changes in mobil-
ity and perceived safety, few evaluations have been able to quantify
the effect on safety. The National Center for Safe Routes to School,

in its Federal Safe Routes to School Evaluation Plan (33), recom-
mended the use of three evaluation components that can help in
evaluating the extent to which changes in walking and bicycling and
safety occur:


1. Documenting state program processes,
2. Monitoring implementation of projects and overall walking
and bicycling trends, and
3. Conducting project effectiveness studies.


Crash outcomes are the recommended long-term outcome measure
for safety and may affect walking and bicycling. The development of
methods to evaluate the impacts of infrastructure has mirrored what

has been established for vehicle safety and volume. Evaluation is nec-
essary in competing against other programs for limited transportation
dollars. Not only can evaluation inform the funding of programs, it
can also support public policy efforts to promote active transportation

with scientific evidence. The lack of quantifiable results has limited

the establishment of active transportation programs and funding for
programs that compete with traditional transportation safety pro-
grams. Evidence from this research can contribute substantially to
the field.



Acknowledgments

This research was conducted with funding from the Robert Wood

Johnson Foundation’s Active Living Research Program. Thomas
Rice provided key statistical modeling as part of the SafeTREC
team. Partners in this research were Tracy McMillan and Marlon
91


Boarnet. The authors greatly appreciate their contributions to this
research.


References

1. Lee, S. M., C. R. Burgeson, J. E. Fulton, and C. G. Spain. Physical Edu-
cation and Physical Activity: Results from the School Health Policies
and Programs Study 2006. Journal of School Health, Vol. 77, No. 8,
2007, pp. 435–463.
2. McDonald, N. C., A. L. Brown, L. M. Marchetti, and M. S. Pedroso. U.S.
School Travel, 2009: An Assessment of Trends. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, Vol. 41, No. 2, 2011, pp. 146–151.
3. Beck, L. F., and A. I. Greenspan. Why Don’t More Children Walk to
School? Journal of Safety Research, Vol. 39, No. 5, 2008, pp. 449–452.
4. Traffic Safety Facts, 2010 Data. Bicyclists and Other Cyclists. DOT HS
810 986. NHTSA, U.S. Department of Transportation, 2012.
5. Clifton, K. J., and K. Kreamer-Fults. An Examination of the Environ-
mental Attributes Associated with Pedestrian–Vehicular Crashes near
Public Schools. Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 39, No. 4, 2007,
pp. 708–715.
6. Cohen, D. A., S. Ashwood, M. Scott, A. Overton, K. R. Evenson, C. C.
Voorhees, A. Bedimo-Rung, and T. L. McKenzie. Proximity to School
and Physical Activity Among Middle School Girls: The Trial of Activ-
ity for Adolescent Girls Study. Journal of Physical Activity and Health,
Vol. 118, No. 5, 2006, pp. 1381–1389.
7. DiGuiseppi, C., I. Roberts, L. Li, and D. Allen. Determinants of
Car Travel on Daily Journeys to School: Cross Sectional Survey of
Primary School Children. British Medical Journal, Vol. 316, 1998,
pp. 1426–1428.
8. Martin, S., and S. Carlson. Barriers to Children Walking to or from

School: United States, 2004. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
Vol. 54, No. 38, 2005, pp. 949–952.
9. McDonald, N. C. Active Transportation to School: Trends Among U.S.
Schoolchildren, 1969–2001. American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
Vol. 32, No. 6, 2007, pp. 509–516.
10. McDonald, N. C. Critical Factors for Active Transportation to School
Among Low-Income and Minority Students: Evidence from the 2001
National Household Travel Survey. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, Vol. 34, No. 4, 2008, pp. 341–344.
11. McMillan, T., K. Day, M. Boarnet, M. Alfonzo, and C. Anderson.
Johnny Walks to School—and Does Jane? Sex Differences in Children’s
Active Travel to School. Children, Youth and Environments, Vol. 16,
No. 1, 2006, pp. 75–89.
12. McMillan, T. E. The Relative Influence of Urban Form on a Child’s
Travel Mode to School. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2007, pp. 69–79.
13. Schlossberg, M., J. Greene, P. P. Phillips, B. Johnson, and B. Parker.
School Trips: Effects of Urban Form and Distance on Travel Mode.
Journal of the American Planning Association, Vol. 72, No. 3, 2006,
pp. 337–346.
14. Timperio, A., K. Ball, J. Salmon, R. Roberts, B. Giles-Corti, D. Simmons,
L. A. Bauer, and D. Crawford. Personal, Family, Social, and Environ-
mental Correlates of Active Commuting to School. American Journal
of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 30, No. 1, 2006, pp. 45–51.
15. Yeung, J., S. Wearing, and A. P. Hills. Child Transport Practices
and Perceived Barriers in Active Commuting to School. Transpor-
tation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, Vol. 42, No. 6, 2008,

pp. 895–900.
16. Ziviani, J., J. Scott, and D. Wadley. Walking to School: Incidental Physical
Activity in the Daily Occupations of Australian Children. Occupational
Therapy International, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2004, pp. 1–11.
17. Martin, S. L., S. M. Lee, and R. Lowry. National Prevalence and Corre-
lates of Walking and Bicycling to School. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, Vol. 33, No. 2, 2007, pp. 98–105.
18. Boarnet, M. G., K. Day, C. Anderson, T. McMillan, and M. Alfonzo.
California’s Safe Routes to School Program: Impacts on Walking, Bicy-
cling, and Pedestrian Safety. Journal of the American Planning Associa-
tion, Vol. 71, No. 3, 2005, pp. 301–317.
19. Appleyard, B. S. Planning Safe Routes to School: How Will My Child
Get to and from School? Planning, Vol. 69, No. 5, 2003, pp. 34–37.
20. Orenstein, M. R., N. Gutierrez, T. R. Rice, J. F. Cooper, and D. R. Ragland.
Safe Routes to School Safety and Mobility Analysis: Report to the
