

Parental Attitudes Toward Children
Walking and Bicycling to School
Multivariate Ordered Response Analysis

Saamiya Seraj, Raghuprasad Sidharthan, Chandra R. Bhat,
Ram M. Pendyala, and Konstadinos G. Goulias

Recent research suggests that, besides traditional sociodemographic and
built environment attributes, the attitudes and perceptions of parents
toward walking and bicycling play a crucial role in deciding which travel
modes children take to school. However, little is known about the factors
that shape these parental attitudes. The current study aims to investi-
gate this unexplored avenue of research and to identify the influences
on parental attitudes toward children walking and bicycling to school
as part of a larger nationwide effort to make children more physically
active and combat rising trends of childhood obesity in the United States.
Through the use of a multivariate ordered response model (a model
structure that allows different attitudes to be correlated), the current study
analyzes five parental attitudes toward children walking and bicycling to
school on the basis of data drawn from the California add-on sample of
the 2009 National Household Travel Survey. In particular, the subsample
from the Los Angeles–Riverside–Orange County area is used in this
study to take advantage of a rich set of microaccessibility measures that
are available for this region. It is found that school accessibility, work
patterns, current mode use in the household, and sociodemographic
characteristics shape parental attitudes toward children walking and
bicycling to school. The study findings provide insights on policies, strat-
egies, and campaigns that may help shift parental attitudes to be more
favorable toward children walking and bicycling to school.


In recent years, there has been an alarming increase in the rate of
obesity among children in the United States. The latest statistics
suggest that nearly one in five school-aged children is obese, a rate
that has tripled from just 30 years ago (1, 2). Because obesity rates
are being tied to sedentary lifestyles, there is a vast body of literature
at the interface of transportation and public health that identifies and
quantifies the influence of various factors on levels of physical activ-
ity and the use of active modes of transportation, namely, walking
and bicycling (3–5). Despite the potential benefits associated with
using nonmotorized modes of transportation for travel to and from


S. Seraj, R. Sidharthan, and C. R. Bhat, Department of Civil, Architectural, and
Environmental Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station
C1761, Austin, TX 78712-0278. R. M. Pendyala, School of Sustainable Engineer-
ing and the Built Environment, Arizona State University, Room ECG252, Tempe,

AZ 85287-5306. K. G. Goulias, Department of Geography, 1832 Ellison Hall, Univer-
sity of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060. Corresponding
author: C. R. Bhat, bhat@mail.utexas.edu.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
No. 2323, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington,

D.C., 2012, pp. 46–55.
DOI: 10.3141/2323-06










school, these modes have experienced a dramatic decline in modal
share over the past 40 years. Whereas in 1969 nearly one-half of all
school trips were made by walking or bicycling, by 2009 that share
had dropped to under 15% (6).
There is a vast body of literature that identifies and quantifies the
influence of demographic, built environment, and socioeconomic
characteristics on the mode of travel to school. Of the demographic
variables, the child’s age, gender, and ethnicity or race have been
found to significantly impact the modal choice for school travel
(7–12). In general, older children and boys are more likely to walk
or bicycle to school than other children. On the issue of race, papers
present conflicting results, with some studies attributing this difference
to underlying factors, such as household socioeconomic status and
residential location (11). Other papers suggest that these differences
could be the result of cultural variations in attitudes and perceptions
among parents of different ethnicities (9). Finally, built environment
attributes and accessibility variables are also important determinants
of children’s modes of travel to school. The distance to school is
one of the most notable variables that influence the choice to use
nonmotorized modes of transportation (13, 14). There is a growing
body of evidence that parental attitudes and opinions are also criti-
cal determinants of children’s school travel mode. In a study based
in Southern California, McMillan found that the attitudes and per-
ceptions of parents regarding the safety and traffic situation of the
neighborhood, as well as certain social norms, were more important
in influencing the choice of school travel mode than built environ-
ment attributes (9). Children with parents who had greater concerns
about traffic conditions or neighborhood safety were less likely to
walk or cycle to school. Timperio et al. found that parental percep-
tions of the neighborhood were more strongly related to the choice
of children’s travel mode than the child’s own perceptions of the
neighborhood (7). Zhu and Lee reported similar findings and noted
that parents’ perceptions of barriers were greater deterrents to walking
and bicycling than children’s perceptions of barriers (15). Zhu and
Lee found that a child was four times more likely to walk if the
parent perceived the distance to be close enough for the child to walk.
The Zhu and Lee (15) study, as well as the study of Wen et al. (16),
showed that actual experience with the nonmotorized modes of


transportation influenced parental attitudes and perceptions of the
built environment and neighborhood safety. Parents of children
who walked regularly to school perceived the built environment
and neighborhood to be less dangerous than parents whose children
did not walk or bicycle to school.


Despite studies that show the clear importance of parental attitudes
and perceptions toward bicycling and walking in the choice of mode
for school travel, there is a dearth of research on identifying and


46

Seraj, Sidharthan, Bhat, Pendyala, and Goulias


quantifying the influence of various factors on these attitudes and
perceptions. In the case of school-going children, parents are likely
to play a strong decision-making role when it comes to modal choice
for school-related travel. Thus, insights into the factors that shape
parental attitudes and perceptions toward their children walking and
bicycling to school would greatly aid professionals in designing poli-
cies, campaigns, and built environments that would help promote the
use of these modes. A few studies provide initial indications of the
factors that are likely to influence parental attitudes and perceptions.
Timperio et al. noted that the age of the child and the household’s
socioeconomic status influenced parental attitudes and perceptions
(7). Johansson, who looked broadly at children’s leisure travel, found
that parents of older children adopted a more positive attitude toward
independent travel than parents of younger children (17). Parents
in households with higher levels of car ownership were found to
be more inclined toward chauffeuring their children by car and less
inclined toward supporting independent travel by the child.
This paper is motivated by previous work that suggests the pres-
ence of strong associations between attitudes and travel behavior
[see van Acker et al. (18)]. Theoretical frameworks that describe the
underlying reasons for and the nature of the associations between
attitudes and behavior are offered by Ajzen and Fishbein (19). Van
Acker et al. developed a model, based on frameworks presented by
Ajzen and Fishbein, that included a spatial component and a socio-
economic component from the theories of transport geography and a
personality component from the theories of social psychology (18).
In this context, this paper aims to shed additional light on parental
attitudes and perceptions toward bicycling and walking as modes
of transportation for children’s school travel. The paper provides a
more comprehensive examination of the factors that shape parental
attitudes and perceptions toward these modes by simultaneously
considering five attitudinal variables in a joint model system. Each
attitudinal variable is an ordered response variable; the response
indicates the extent to which the factor is considered by the parent to
be an issue in their children walking or bicycling to school. A multi­
variate ordered response model is formulated and applied in this
paper to account for the presence of possible correlations between
unobserved attributes that simultaneously affect different attitudinal
variables. The model system is estimated on a subsample of the
California add-on of the 2009 National Household Travel Survey,
which included a series of questions on parental attitudes toward
children bicycling and walking to and from school. In particular,
the subsample from the Southern California region covered by the
Los Angeles–Riverside–Orange County consolidated metropolitan
statistical area is chosen because of the availability of a rich set
of microaccessibility measures that can be included in the model
specification.
One of the key hypotheses that motivated this study was that par-
ents of children who regularly walked or cycled were less likely to
be concerned about the various factors that served as deterrents to
the use of nonmotorized modes of transportation. It was postulated
that such parents are likely to be more aware of the built environ-
ment and their children’s navigational abilities than parents whose
children did not walk or bicycle as much. In the absence of infor-
mation, parents in the latter group are more likely to develop an
exaggerated sense of danger associated with the use of nonmotorized
modes and, thus, are less likely to permit their children to walk or
bicycle to school.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The second
section presents the modeling methodology adopted in this paper.
47


The third section describes the data used in this study and presents
descriptive statistics of the sample. The fourth section presents model
estimation results. The final section offers conclusions and a discussion
of the policy implications of the results.


Modeling Methodology

A multivariate ordered response modeling structure is used for the
current study. The modeling framework assumes the presence of
an underlying set of multivariate continuous latent variables whose
horizontal partitioning maps into the observed set of ordered outcomes
(in the current empirical context this would be the degree to which
a parent considers a certain factor to be an issue in children walking
or bicycling to school). Such an ordered response system allows the
use of a general covariance matrix for the underlying latent vari-
ables, which translates to a flexible correlation pattern between the
observed ordered outcomes. Although there have been numerous
applications of the univariate ordered response model in previous
transportation literature, the application of multivariate ordered
response models, especially for more than three ordered outcome
variables, is extremely rare. Bhat et al. provide a summary of the
literature in this area and propose the use of the composite marginal
likelihood approach to estimate a multivariate ordered response model
(20). Because the composite marginal likelihood approach uses a
simple estimation technique and requires no simulation machinery,
yet produces consistent and unbiased results, the composite mar-
ginal likelihood approach is used in this study to estimate model
parameters. The remainder of this section presents a brief overview
of the formulation.
Let q be an index for individuals (q = 1, 2, . . . , Q), and let i be
the index for attitudinal variables (i = 1, 2, . . . , I), where I denotes
the total number of attitudinal variables for each individual (in the
current study, I = 5). Let the number of response values for attitudi-
nal variable i be Ki (i.e., the discrete levels indexed by k belong
in {1, 2, . . . , Ki} for variable i). In the usual ordered response
framework notation, the latent propensity (y*qi) for each attitudinal
category is written as a function of the relevant covariates and
related to the observed ordered outcome (yqi) through threshold
bounds (21, 22):


y*qi = ß'i x qi + e qi , yqi = k   if <U+03B8>ik -1 < y*qi < <U+03B8>ik                (1)

where

xqi =	(L × 1) vector of exogenous variables (not including a
constant),
ßi = corresponding (L × 1) vector of coefficients to be estimated,
eqi = standard normal error term, and
<U+03B8> ik =	upper bound threshold for ordered response level k of
attitudinal category i (<U+03B8>i0 < <U+03B8>1i < <U+03B8>i2 < . . . < <U+03B8>iKi; <U+03B8>i0 = -8,
<U+03B8>iKi = +8 for each category i).
The threshold bounds define a range of the underlying latent
continuous variable that corresponds to each observed discrete
outcome. The eqi terms are assumed to be independent and identical
across individuals (for each and all i). For identification reasons, the
variance of each eqi term is normalized to one. However, the model
allows correlation in the eqi terms across attitudinal variables i for each
individual q. If eq = (eq1, eq2, eq3, . . . , eqI)', then eq is multivariate

48


normally distributed (N) with a mean vector of zeros and a correlation

matrix (S) as follows:



<U+F8EE><U+F8EB> 0<U+F8F6> <U+F8EB> 1                        <U+03C1>12 <U+03C1>13  <U+03C1>1I <U+F8F6> <U+F8F9>



<U+F8EF><U+F8EC> <U+F8F7> <U+F8EC>
<U+F8EF><U+F8EC> 0 <U+F8F7> <U+F8EC> <U+03C1>21
<U+F8F7><U+F8FA>
1 <U+03C1>23  <U+03C1>2 I <U+F8F7> <U+F8FA>





e q ~ N <U+F8EF><U+F8EC> <U+F8F7> , <U+F8EC>
<U+F8EF><U+F8EC>  <U+F8F7> <U+F8EC>                                <U+F8F7><U+F8FA>
<U+F8F7><U+F8FA>



<U+F8EF><U+F8EC> <U+F8F7> <U+F8EC>
<U+F8EF><U+F8F0><U+F8ED> 0 <U+F8F8> <U+F8ED> <U+03C1>I 1
<U+F8F7><U+F8FA>
<U+03C1>I 2 <U+03C1>I 3  1 <U+F8F8> <U+F8FA><U+F8FB>








or


e q ~ N [ 0, S ]



The off-diagonal terms of S capture the error covariance across
the underlying latent continuous variables of the different attitudinal
variables. In other words, the off-diagonal terms of S capture the
effects of common unobserved factors that influence the propensity
of ordered response levels for each attitudinal variable. Thus, if <U+03C1>12
is positive, it implies that individuals with a higher than average
propensity to cite the first attitudinal variable as an issue are also likely
to have a higher than average propensity to cite the second attitudinal
variable as an issue. As a special case, if all the correlation parameters
(i.e., the off-diagonal elements of S stacked into a vertical vector O)
are zero, the model system in Equation 1 collapses to a set of
independent ordered response probit models.
The parameter vector of the multivariate ordered probit model is

d = (ß1' , ß'2 , . . . , ß'I ; <U+03B8>1' , <U+03B8>'2 , . . . , <U+03B8>'I ; <U+2126>' )'


where <U+03B8>i = (<U+03B8>1i, <U+03B8>i2, . . . , <U+03B8>iKi-1)' for i = 1, 2, . . . , I. Let the actual
observed ordered response level for individual q and attitudinal
variable i be mqi. Then, the likelihood function (L) for individual q
may be written as follows:

Lq ( d ) = Pr ( yq1 = mq1 , yq 2 = mq 2 , . . . yqI = mqI )

In other words

mq1 - ß1' xq 1
<U+03B8>1
m - ß 2' xq 2
<U+03B8>2 q2
mqI - ß I' xqI
<U+03B8>I

Lq ( d ) =              <U+222B>                         <U+222B>            ...             <U+222B>
mq1 -1
v1 = <U+03B8>1
m -1
-ß1' x q1 v2 = <U+03B8>2 q2 -ß '2 x q 2
mqI -1
vI = <U+03B8>I       -ß 'I x qI


f I ( v1 , v2 , . . . , vI <U+2126> )dv1 , dv2

where Pr denotes probability and <U+03D5>I is a probability density function
of an I-dimensional multivariate normal distribution.
The likelihood function above requires the computation of an
I-dimensional rectangular integral. The evaluation of such multi-
dimensional normal integrals can be problematic in terms of com-
putational effort, even for moderate sizes of I. Furthermore, such
simulation methods become imprecise as the number of dimensions
increases, leading to convergence problems during estimation. For
these reasons, this paper employs a pairwise marginal likelihood esti-
mation approach that corresponds to a composite marginal approach
based on bivariate margins [see Apanasovich et al. (23) and Bhat
et al. (20) for the use of the pairwise likelihood approach]. The pair-
wise marginal likelihood function (L) for individual q may be written
as follows:
Transportation Research Record 2323


I -1    I

LCML,q ( d ) = <U+220F> <U+220F> Pr ( yqi = mqi , yqg = mqg )
i =1 g = i +1



<U+F8EF>
(
<U+F8EE> F 2 <U+03B8>imqi +1 - ß'i x qi , <U+03B8>mg qg +1 - ß'g x qg , <U+03C1>ig ) <U+F8F9><U+F8FA>




I -1
= <U+220F><U+220F><U+F8EF>
I
(mqi +1                mqg
<U+F8EF> - F 2 <U+03B8>i - ß'i x qi , <U+03B8> g - ß'g x qg , <U+03C1>ig            )<U+F8FA>    (4)


(mqi
i =1 g = i +1 <U+F8EF> - F 2 <U+03B8> i - ß'i x qi , <U+03B8> g
mqg +1
- ß'g x qg , <U+03C1>ig ) <U+F8FA><U+F8FA>




(
<U+F8EF> + F <U+03B8>mqi - ß'x , <U+03B8>mqg - ß' x , <U+03C1>
<U+F8F0>     2     i       i qi       g        g qg       )
ig
<U+F8FA>
<U+F8FB>

and


LCML( d ) = <U+220F> LCML,q ( d )
(2)                q



where CML denotes composite marginal likelihood and F2 () is
the cumulative distribution function of a standard bivariate normal
distribution.
The pairwise likelihood function above is easily maximized,
and the effort involved is no more difficult than in a usual bivariate
ordered probit model. The pairwise estimator d^ CML, obtained by
maximizing the logarithm of the function in Equation 4 with respect
to the vector d, is consistent and asymptotically normally distributed.
Additional inference details of the pairwise estimator are provided
in Bhat et al. (20).


Data Description

In this study, the Southern California portion of the California
add-on sample from the 2009 National Household Travel Survey
was used. This particular sample was used because the California
add-on survey included a series of questions on the attitudes of adults
toward their own bicycling and walking patterns, as well as a series
of questions on the attitudes of parents toward their children walking
and bicycling to school. The subsample from the Southern California
region was from the Los Angeles–Riverside–Orange County con-
solidated metropolitan statistical area and was selected for analysis
because a rich set of microaccessibility measures that describe the
built environment was available for this geographical area.
Descriptive statistics for the sample used in the analysis of this






paper are presented in Tables 1 to 4. After extensive data clean-
ing and filtering, the final sample available for analysis included






1,000 respondents. Only one parent in each household answered these
attitudinal questions for one randomly chosen school-aged child.
, . . . , dvI   (3)   The availability of automobiles was high, with only 2% of households
indicating zero-car ownership. Nearly one-half of the households
fell into the highest income category (of the three categories used in
this paper) of $80,000 and above, thereby suggesting that the sample
used for the analysis in this paper was relatively affluent. As expected,
household size distribution was skewed toward larger households, as
the sample chosen for analysis included only those households that
had at least one child. A vast majority of the households were located
in an urban area (as defined by the urban–rural classifications in the
2000 census). A majority of children were found to travel to and
from school by car. However, the percentage of children bicycling or
walking to school was about 21%, which was higher than the national
average of 13% (24). About 38% of the children resided less than
1 mi from the school location; about an equal percentage resided
more than 2 mi from school. The former group was a candidate for
walking and bicycling to school; the use of such modes was likely to

Seraj, Sidharthan, Bhat, Pendyala, and Goulias


TABLE 1   Sample Data for Parental Attitudes

Characteristic                  Number of Responses

Crime
   Not an issue                          437
   Little bit of an issue                178
   Somewhat of an issue                  154
   Very much an issue                     87
   A serious issue                       144
Weather
   Not an issue                          592
   Little bit of an issue                183
   Somewhat of an issue                  141
   Very much an issue                     43
   A serious issue                        41
Speed of traffic
   Not an issue                          180
   Little bit of an issue                115
   Somewhat of an issue                  223

   Very much an issue                    179
   A serious issue                       303
Volume of traffic
   Not an issue                          175
   Little bit of an issue                125
   Somewhat of an issue                  199
   Very much an issue                    188
   A serious issue                       313
Distance to school
   Not an issue                          285
   Little bit of an issue                126
   Somewhat of an issue                  135
   Very much an issue                    156
   A serious issue                       298

Note: Sample size = 1,000.


be a challenge for the latter group (13). About 15% of the children
attended private school, which is another indicator that the sample was
relatively affluent. The parents in the sample were rather well edu-
cated, with about 70% indicating their education level as “some col-
lege or above.” Of the fathers, 87% were workers; the corresponding
percentage for mothers was lower, at just under 60%. In households
with both a father and a mother, 54% indicated that both parents were
workers. Thirty percent of these households listed both parents as
working full time. It is likely that these latter households, in par-


TABLE 2   Sample Data for Household Characteristics

Characteristic       Percentage         Characteristic           Percentage

Household size                          Race
  2                      2.3              Caucasian                 59.9
  3                     19.9              Hispanic                  19.7
  4                     43                Asian                      9.6
   5 and above          34.8              African-American           4.6
Vehicles                                  Other                      6.2
  0                      2.1            Location
  1                     14                Urban area                95
  2                     47.7              Nonurban area              5
  =3                    36.2
Income
  Low                   22.8
  Medium                29
  High                  48.2

Note: Sample size = 1,000.
49


TABLE 3   Sample Data for School Characteristics

Characteristic         Percentage      Characteristic          Percentage

Mode to school                         Distance to school
  Car                        68.7        <1 mi                   38.4
  Bus                         9.4        1–2 mi                  22.9
   Walk or bike              20.7        >2 mi                   38.7
  Other                       1.2      Type
Mode from school                         Public school           85
  Car                        63.2        Private school          15
  Bus                        11
   Walk or bike              24.9
  Other                       0.9

Note: Sample size = 1,000.




ticular, face time–space constraints associated with work schedules
and locations that affect their children’s activity-travel patterns and
mode choices.
The parents were asked to describe the level of concern they had
about the dangers and difficulties their children might face while
walking or bicycling to school. Responses to these questions consti-

tuted the dependent variables in this study. More specifically, the five
interrelated dependent variables in this study were the responses that
parents gave when they were asked to indicate the extent to which
each of the following items was an issue in the context of their children
bicycling or walking to school:


•   Distance between home and school,
•   Violence or crime along the route to school,
•   Speed of traffic along the route to school,
•   Amount of traffic along the route to school, and
•   Poor weather or climate in the area.

The response scale ranged from one to five, with a response of one
indicating that the item was not considered an issue and a response of
five indicating that the item was considered to be a serious issue or
deterrent to the parent allowing the child to bicycle or walk to and
from school. Table 1 presents the distribution of responses provided
by parents to these five attitudinal variables. Of the five attitudinal
factors considered in this paper, the three factors that were most
cited as being serious issues were the volume of traffic, the speed
of traffic, and the distance to school (in that order). About 30% of
the parents considered these three items to be serious issues that
acted as deterrents to their children walking and bicycling to school.
About 60% of the parents considered weather not to be an issue,



TABLE 4   Sample Data for Parental Characteristics

Characteristic                           Percentage

Father
  Worker                                      87.3
   Education: some college or above           73
Mother
  Worker                                      58.7
   Education: some college or above           69.7
Both parents
   Both parents are workers                   54.5
   Both parents are full-time workers         30

Note: Sample size = 1,000.

50


generally reflecting the favorable weather conditions in the Southern
California region. About 44% of the parents considered crime not
to be an issue. This statistic may be reflective of the larger share of
high-income households (recall that nearly one in two households
fell into the highest income category used in this study) that are likely
to be located in safer and more affluent neighborhoods. However,
perceptions of personal safety were important, as evidenced by the
nearly 20% of parents who considered crime to be very much an issue
or a serious issue when it came to their children walking or bicycling
to school.
The analysis for this paper considered a host of explanatory vari-
ables that might affect parental attitudes toward children bicycling
and walking to and from school. The explanatory variables could be
broadly classified into five categories: school attributes, children’s
attributes, parent’s attributes, household attributes, and built envi-
ronment attributes. Built environment attributes included a host of
accessibility variables that measured transportation access and desti-
nation opportunities. Accessibility measures included, for example,
the total network length that a household could access within 10 min
of the residential location by driving a car at 30 mph. Destination
opportunity–based measures captured the number of employees in
the types of industry that could be accessed within various travel
time buffers (10 min, 20 min, and 50 min). Accessibility measures
were developed for 15 types of industry. Additional details on the
formulation and development of these measures may be found in
Chen et al. (25).


Model Estimation Results

This section presents a detailed discussion of the model estimation
results. One of the key hypotheses that motivated this study was that
as children walked or bicycled more, parents were less likely to be
concerned about the perceived deterrents to the use of nonmotorized
modes of transportation. It was postulated that such parents would
be more likely to be aware of the actual walking and bicycling con-
ditions and confident about their children’s ability to safely navigate
the built environment than parents whose children did not walk or
bicycle as much. The latter group, in the absence of information about
the actual walking and bicycling environment and their children’s
navigation abilities, would be more likely to have an exaggerated
sense of danger associated with bicycling and walking. This exagger-
ated sense of danger would, in turn, make them less likely to permit
their children to walk or bicycle to school. The model estimation
results (as will be discussed in this section) generally confirmed that
this hypothesis could not be rejected. Therefore, understanding the
influences behind these parental attitudes is very important because
such an understanding would be crucial in the design of policies,
campaigns, and built environments that would help make attitudes
toward bicycling and walking more positive.
The remainder of this section provides a discussion of the results,
organized according to the set of explanatory variables under con-
sideration. The multivariate ordered response model system estimated
in this paper included a set of five equations, one for each attitudinal
variable. The complete model estimation results are presented in
Table 5. As the focus of the analysis was exclusively on the extraction
of behavioral relationships (as opposed to forecasting applications),
it was considered sufficient to perform model estimation on the
un­weighted survey sample. Given the nature of the model form
and specification, the relationships found in this analysis may be
considered representative of the nature of the influences of various
Transportation Research Record 2323


attributes on parental attitudes. Most of the model coefficients were
statistically significant at the .05 level (these are the estimates in
Table 5 with no superscript identifiers). A few variables were, how-
ever, not statistically significant even at the .1 level; these variables
were retained in the model specification for their intuitively appealing
behavioral interpretation.


Effect of School Attributes on Parental Attitudes

The first set of variables presented in Table 5 pertains to school
attributes, namely, the distance to school and whether the school is a
public or private school. As expected, when the distance to school was
less than a quarter-mile, parents were less likely to consider weather or
distance to be impediments to walking or bicycling to school. As the
distance increased, the coefficients showed an increasing trend for
the variable that represented distance to school, thereby signifying
that parents considered the distance to school to be an increasingly
serious issue as the actual distance of the school from their homes
increased. When the distance was over 2 mi, parents also considered
the speed and the volume of traffic to be major issues (as evidenced
by the positive coefficients of 0.303 and 0.390 in Table 5). The
findings here were quite consistent with those reported in the litera-
ture concerning the adverse effect of distance on the modal shares
of bicycling or walking to school (13, 15). However, crime was
considered less of an issue in the context of the distance to school
being greater than 2 mi. This counterintuitive result merits further
investigation, but it is possible that when the distance is greater than
2 mi, other considerations (such as traffic) become more serious
issues than crime, thus resulting in the negative coefficient for this
variable. It was found that parents of children who attended private
schools were quite sensitive to crime and to the speed and volume
of traffic. It is possible that private schools are located farther away
from the home location, which raises concerns about these factors.
As private school children tend to be more car dependent (26, 27), it is
also possible that the lack of first-hand knowledge of the walking and
bicycling environment may result in parents being more concerned
about these factors than parents whose children have experienced the
built environment for themselves. The greater level of car dependence
among private school children (and the resulting absence of expo-
sure to weather) may explain why parents of private school children
were less concerned about the weather.


Effect of Children’s Attributes
on Parental Attitudes

As expected, children’s ages and genders, as well as the children’s
current levels of bicycling and walking activities, influenced their
parents’ attitudes toward walking or bicycling to school. As the age
of the child increased, parents were less likely to consider the speed
of traffic and the distance to school to be serious issues associated
with walking or bicycling. This is intuitive because parents are
likely to consider older children to be more independent and mature
and, thus, capable of navigating the path to and from school safely.
These findings were consistent with those reported by Timperio
et al. (7), Alton et al. (8), and Johansson (17), all of whom noted
that age was a significant variable associated with the choice of
children’s travel mode and independent travel.
Parents of boys were less likely to be concerned about crime,
the speed of traffic, and the distance to school. It appears that parents

52


consider boys to be less vulnerable to crime and better able to handle
longer distances and higher-speed traffic environments. In general,
this finding is consistent with expectation, and there is evidence in
the literature to support these results. Studies by Prezza et al. (10),
McMillan (9), and McDonald (28) indicated that boys were generally
allowed to travel more independently than girls. However, a few
studies [e.g., Alton et al. (8) and Johansson (17)] found no significant
gender differences in independent travel to and from school. The
results in this paper appear to suggest that gender does play a role in
how parents view the ability of the child to travel independently to and
from school. This viewpoint, in turn, is likely to impact modal choice,
as evidenced in a review by Sirard and Slater that found parental
evaluation of a child’s navigational abilities to be a big influence on
modal choices (29).
Parents of children who bicycled and walked regularly were less
concerned about crime and the distance to school. As these children

have already shown that they can safely navigate the built environ-

ment and travel independently by bicycling and walking, it is not

surprising that parents of these children consider issues of crime

and distance to be less serious than other parents do. Moreover, these

parents are likely to be more aware of the actual walking and bicycling

conditions, and the greater level of awareness may help ameliorate

concerns about crime, safety, and the abilities of their children. These

findings are consistent with the results reported by Cooper et al.,

which suggested that children who walked or cycled to school were
more physically active overall than their counterparts who traveled to
school by motorized transport (30, 31). Information campaigns aimed
at providing better information about crime and safety in neighbor-
hoods may help shift parental attitudes positively toward their children
bicycling and walking to and from school.


Effect of Household Attributes
on Parental Attitudes

With respect to the role of household attributes in shaping parental
attitudes, parents in higher-income households generally had lower
levels of concern about crime and weather. It is possible that these
households are in safer, more affluent neighborhoods in which crime
is not an overriding concern in the context of bicycling or walking
to school. In addition, these households are likely to be more auto-
mobile oriented (suburban, higher–car ownership households); hence,
there may be a lower level of sensitivity to weather from parents in
these households. Car ownership itself did not prove to be signifi-
cant in explaining parental attitudes toward bicycling and walking.
One reason for this may be that virtually all the households had at
least one car, thus making car ownership a nonissue in terms of its
influence on parental attitudes toward bicycling and walking. In a
region such as Southern California, where car ownership is quite
universal, it is reasonable to expect car ownership to play virtually
no role in shaping attitudes about walking and bicycling. Perhaps an
effect would have been observed had there been a sizable number
of households with no cars.
A variety of race and ethnicity variables affected parental attitudes
toward walking and bicycling. There was no discernible pattern, but
the fact that several race variables entered the model specification
and were statistically significant suggests that there are potential
sociodemographic and cultural differences across racial groups that
affect parental attitudes toward bicycling and walking. As noted by
McDonald, it is possible that the racial differences are attributable
Transportation Research Record 2323


to other underlying reasons, and the race variables themselves are
simply proxies in capturing such effects (11).
As the number of workers in a household increased, parents tended
to be more sensitive to crime, although the coefficient was statistically
insignificant. It is not clear why this may be the case, but there may
be a heightened sense of concern for the safety of children among
parents in households in which the adults all work outside the home.
Parents in households of larger size and who are renting their residence
are more prone to considering the distance to school to be an issue that
deters walking and bicycling, perhaps because these households are
farther from the school location.


Effect of Parents’ Attributes
on Their Own Attitudes

This section offers a discussion of how the characteristics of the

parents impact their attitudes toward walking and bicycling. If the

father used public transit, then the parents were less likely to be con-

cerned about crime, the volume of traffic, and the distance to school.

The greater level of awareness and knowledge of the environment

that comes from public transit use potentially contributed to this

lower level of concern. However, when the mother used public transit,

there was a heightened sensitivity to crime (though this variable was

statistically insignificant). When at least one parent used public transit,
the results showed a greater concern for weather. Similarly, as the time
spent by the father or mother walking or bicycling increased, there was
a greater level of concern related to the speed of traffic. In other words,
it appeared that the level of awareness and experience in using the
built environment for walking and bicycling might work both ways.
In the case of crime, the volume of traffic, and the distance to school,
the sensitivity was reduced, but in the case of weather and the speed
of traffic, the sensitivity was heightened. These findings were quite
intuitive and consistent with expectations. The frequency of walking
and bicycle trips on the part of the mother lowered concerns regard-
ing the distance to school, once again suggesting that familiarity and
knowledge of the built environment may lower concerns related to
distance. The use of alternative modes of transportation for work
travel on the part of the parents specifically lowered concerns related
to the volume of traffic. If a father or mother takes transit, bicycles,
or walks to work, then it is likely that he or she has a greater level
of knowledge and awareness of the actual traffic conditions and this
knowledge, in turn, lowers the level of sensitivity associated with
traffic volumes.
With respect to the educational attainment of the parents, higher
levels of education for the mother were associated with greater levels
of sensitivity and concern for virtually all attitudinal variables except
weather. It appears that parents in such households tend to amplify
the level of concern associated with various deterrents to walking and
bicycling to school, although it is not exactly clear why that might
be the case.
The work arrangements of the parents play a key role in shaping
their attitudes toward bicycling and walking as modes of transporta-
tion to and from school. In general, greater levels of flexibility asso-
ciated with work arrangements and schedules lowered the level of
concern or sensitivity with respect to various attitudinal measures
including crime, weather, distance, and traffic volume. It is likely
that parents who have flexible work arrangements and schedules feel
more confident that they can be available for the child and respond
to emergency situations in a timely manner. In addition, parents who
have flexible work arrangements and schedules are more likely to be

Seraj, Sidharthan, Bhat, Pendyala, and Goulias


able to walk or cycle with their children to and from school, thus low-
ering concerns about personal safety, distance, and traffic conditions.
However, parents who have rigid work schedules are more likely to
chauffer their children to and from school because of schedule con-
straints. This finding is consistent with those reported by Yarlagadda
and Srinivasan, who found that mothers with fixed work schedules
were more likely to drive their children to school than mothers with
flexible work schedules (32). Similarly, Zhu and Lee found that chil-
dren of parents who thought that “walking their kids to school required
too much planning” were less likely to walk or bicycle to school,
presumably because these parents were just too time constrained to
undertake such planning (15). This observation is further supported
by the finding in this paper that a father’s need to arrive at work in
the morning (rigidity in the work schedule) heightened the level of
concern associated with the distance to school. From a policy stand-
point, it appears that providing parents with flexible work arrangements
could have a positive impact on their attitudes regarding children
bicycling or walking to and from school. It is not entirely clear why
parents in households in which both parents work full time consider
the speed of traffic and the volume of traffic to be of less concern than
other parents. This finding merits further investigation; it may be that
these parents consider crime and distance to be greater deterrents
than traffic conditions to walking and bicycling.


Effect of Built Environment Attributes
on Parental Attitudes

The final set of variables included in the model system represents
the built environment. A host of variables were considered, but only
a few eventually made their way into the final model. As the length
of primary arterials accessible to the household increased, the parents
tended to be more sensitive to crime. Because areas with greater street
access and density are perceived to have higher crime rates, as evi-
denced in studies by Harries (33) and Foster and Giles-Corti (34),
it is reasonable to expect parents in such areas to be more worried
about personal safety for their children. Parents in households that
had greater levels of access to freeways were found to be less sensitive
to weather and traffic speed considerations. As expected, parents in
households in a nonurban location considered the volume of traffic to
be less of an issue than parents in households in an urban location. This
observation is presumably attributable to the lower levels of traffic
volumes in nonurban locations that naturally lead to lower levels of
concern for this measure. None of the built environment measures
affected parental attitudes related to the distance to school. For
example, it could be hypothesized that higher levels of access and
street connectivity could potentially lead to lower levels of concern
about distance. However, no such effects were found in this study.
Further research is needed to explore how microaccessibility measures
formulated at different spatial scales affect parental attitudes toward
their children’s mode of travel to school.


Error Correlation Matrix and Data Fit

The use of the multivariate ordered response model formulation
allowed the estimation of correlations between the unobserved error
components of the five attitudinal dependent variables considered
in this paper. Information about correlations across error terms
provides valuable insights on how different attitudinal variables are
related to one another and how policies that address one attitudinal
53


measure might have an impact on other attitudinal measures. The
estimated error correlations are shown in Table 5.
As expected, the unobserved error terms associated with attitudes
toward the volume of traffic and attitudes toward the speed of traffic
were highly positively correlated. This finding suggests that measures
to reduce speed, such as the implementation of traffic calming devices,
would not only lessen parents’ anxieties about the speed of traffic,
it would also make parents less worried about the volume of traffic
that their children have to encounter. This correlation of attitudes is
natural given that both of these attitudes measure perspectives on
traffic conditions.
The error term associated with distance was found to be positively
correlated with the volume and speed of traffic. Again, this finding
is consistent with expectations because concerns about distance are
likely to be related to concerns about exposure to traffic because the
likelihood of coming across bad traffic conditions increases with
distance. In other words, it appears important to have good schools in
close proximity to residential neighborhoods. Reducing the distance
between home and school not only reduces concerns about distance
but also reduces concerns about the volume and speed of traffic to
which children would be exposed. Other unobserved error components
showed moderate positive correlations.
The estimated multivariate model was evaluated by comparing
the model with a restricted model that corresponded to independent
ordered response estimations for each of the five attitudinal variables.
The two models were compared through the adjusted composite
likelihood ratio test [see Pace et al. (35) and Bhat (36) for details].
This statistic had a chi-squared asymptotic distribution with 10 degrees
of freedom. The statistic was 368.9, which was higher than the cor-
responding critical chi-squared value with 10 degrees of freedom at
any reasonable level of significance. This finding indicated the clear
data fit superiority of the multivariate model estimated here and
indicated that unobserved factors had the same direction of effect on
the different parental attitude variables regarding children walking
or bicycling to school.


Conclusions

This paper aims to examine the factors that influence parental attitudes
toward children walking or bicycling to school in the context of a
larger effort to make children more physically active and combat
rising trends in childhood obesity. As parents tend to be the primary
decision makers with respect to children’s modes of travel, it is
critical to understand the factors that shape parental attitudes. On the
basis of data from the California add-on sample of the 2009 National
Household Travel Survey, a multivariate ordered response model
was estimated through the composite marginal likelihood approach.
The data set included information on five attitudinal variables that
represented the extent to which parents considered different factors
to be deterrents or issues in the context of their children walking
or bicycling to school. The five attitudinal measures were related to
crime, weather, the volume of traffic, the speed of traffic, and the
distance to school. The multivariate ordered response model formula-
tion accommodated error correlations across equations in the model
system. Model estimation results showed that there were significant
error correlations and that the goodness of fit of the joint model was
statistically superior to that of the independent model system that
ignores error correlations. These findings illustrate the importance of
using a multivariate model system in the empirical context considered
in this paper.

54


It was found that a host of variables affect parental attitudes toward
children walking or bicycling to school. These results have impor-
tant policy implications. First, proximity of schools to residential
neighborhoods is critical to shaping favorable parental attitudes
toward walking and bicycling. Cities, counties, and school districts
should consider how best to size and position a school relative to
the surrounding residential neighborhoods so that it is feasible for
children to bicycle and walk to school. Second, schools and com-
munities should institute programs that help bring about awareness
and knowledge of the walking and bicycling environment among
parents and children. Organizing “walk to school” days could help
bring about this awareness because parents and children would feel
obligated to walk to school on such days and experience the envi-
ronment first hand. To motivate children even more, schools could
set up an incentive-based program, through which, at the end of a
specific time period, the child who has walked or bicycled the most
could win some small token prize (37). Schools should also hold
regular safety demonstrations that would help children become safe

pedestrians or cyclists. These demonstrations could help to quell

some parental concerns about the dangers of active commuting and

promote more independent travel by children. Another way of alle-

viating parental fears is by instituting special programs such as the

“walking bus,” through which a group of children from a neighbor-
hood walk or bicycle to school together with an adult escort (37, 38).
The adult escorts are usually the parents of the children, and the walk-
ing buses are set up on a rotating routine. By taking turns to escort the
children, the parents get to save time, yet still ensure that their child
is accompanied by an adult on the way to school. Third, there should
be a concerted effort to enhance flexibility in the workplace for parents.
It was found that parents with greater levels of work flexibility were
less concerned about various issues related to their children bicycling
or walking to school. Those parents are likely to be more favorable

to the use of nonmotorized modes of transportation because the parents
are, presumably, less time constrained—therefore, they have time to
walk or bicycle with their child to school—and are more confident that
they can respond to any emergency situation.

A key finding of this paper was that error terms associated with
different attitudinal variables were correlated with one another. Cor-
relations were strongest between the speed and volume of traffic,
between distance and traffic variables, and between crime and traf-

fic variables. In general, these findings suggest that transportation
engineers could design built environments that simultaneously ease
multiple parental concerns about children walking or bicycling to
school. For example, traffic calming measures might help to alleviate

concerns related to the speed and volume of traffic. Grid street pat-
terns that reduce travel distances by providing direct connectivity
between home and school and eliminating the need for the child to
walk along busy arterials may ease concerns about the distance to

school and the volume and speed of traffic. In turn, these designs

would also reduce concerns about crime. Thus, a series of urban
design strategies could help shift parental attitudes favorably toward
their children walking and bicycling.
Future efforts in this arena should be aimed at further enhancing the

measurement of built environment attributes (accessibility measures)
and modeling their impact on parental attitudes toward bicycling and
walking. In this study, only a very limited influence of accessibility
measures was found. Additional secondary variables on crime sta-

tistics, traffic patterns, and street connectivity would prove useful in
better understanding how these factors affect attitudes. In addition,
further research needs to be conducted to understand better the direc-
Transportation Research Record 2323


tion of relationships between attitudes, contextual attributes, and
choices. Future efforts should also attempt to control for the effects of
self-selection that may be at play because people are inclined to locate
themselves in environments consistent with their modal preferences.
Another potential issue that might warrant attention is the explora-
tion of the extent to which responses to the attitudinal questions in
the survey were conditioned by behavioral choices. For example, a
parent whose child walks to school might have been inclined to say
that it was a safe neighborhood to justify the choice of letting his
or her child walk to school (regardless of the true safety record of
the neighborhood). Finally, data about children’s attitudes toward
bicycling and walking should be collected and analyzed to see how
children’s own attitudes are shaped by various factors, and how these
attitudes, in turn, influence choices.


Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to five anonymous reviewers for their

valuable comments on an earlier version of the paper. The authors

acknowledge support from the Southern California Association of

Governments for facilitating this research. The authors are grateful

to Lisa Macias for her help in formatting this document. Finally, the
authors acknowledge support from the Sustainable Cities Doctoral
Research Initiative at the Center for Sustainable Development at the
University of Texas at Austin.


References

1. Division of Adolescent and School Health. The Obesity Epidemic and
United States Students. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2011. http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/yrbs/pdf/us_obesity_combo.pdf.
Accessed July 25, 2011.
2. Ogden, C., and M. Carroll. Prevalence of Obesity Among Children
and Adolescents: United States, Trends 1963–1965 through 2007–2008.
National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2010. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_child_
07_08/obesity_child_07_08.pdf. Accessed July 25, 2011.
3. Handy, S. L., M. G. Boarnet, R. Ewing, and R. E. Killingsworth. How
the Built Environment Affects Physical Activity: Views from Urban
Planning. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2002,
pp. 64–73.
4. Frank, L. D., M. A. Andresen, and T. L. Schmid. Obesity Relationships
with Community Design, Physical Activity, and Time Spent in Cars.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 27, No. 2, 2004,
pp. 87–96.
5. Badland, H., and G. Schofield. Transport, Urban Design, and Physical
Activity: An Evidence-Based Update. Transportation Research Part D,
Vol. 10, No. 3, 2005, pp. 177–196.
6. National Safe Routes to School Task Force. Safe Routes to School:
A Transportation Legacy. A National Strategy to Increase Safety and
Physical Activity Among American Youth. July 2008. http://www.safe
routesinfo.org/sites/default/files/task_force_report.web_.pdf. Accessed

July 25, 2011.
7. Timperio, A., D. Crawford, A. Telford, and J. Salmon. Perceptions About
the Local Neighborhood and Walking and Cycling Among Children.
Preventive Medicine, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2004, pp. 39–47.
8. Alton, D., P. Adab, L. Roberts, and T. Barrett. Relationship Between
Walking Levels and Perceptions of the Local Neighborhood Environment.
Archives of Disease in Childhood, Vol. 92, No. 1, 2007, pp. 29–33.
9. McMillan, T. E. The Relative Influence of Urban Form on a Child’s Travel
Mode to School. Transportation Research Part A, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2007,
pp. 69–79.
10. Prezza, M., S. Pilloni, C. Morabito, C. Sersante, F. M. Alparone, and
M. V. Giuliani. Factors on Children’s Independent Mobility and Rela-
tionship to Peer Frequentation. Journal of Community Applications in
Social Psychology, Vol. 11, No. 6, 2001, pp. 435–450.
