

Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Travel Behaviour and Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tbs
Exploring children’s school travel, psychological well-being, and travel-                                                                                                     T
related attitudes: Evidence from primary and secondary school children in
Vienna, Austria
Juliane Starka, , Patrick A. Singletonb, Tina Uhlmanna
<U+204E>
a
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Department of Landscape, Spatial and Infrastructure Sciences, Institute for Transport Studies, Peter Jordan St. 82, 1190
Vienna, Austria
b
Utah State University, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 4110 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322-4110, United States
ARTICLE INFO                                                  ABSTRACT
Keywords:                                                     In line with global trends of declining physical activity and growing obesity, children’s school travel nowadays is
Children                                                      often characterized by being driven to school instead of walking and cycling. In order to counter these trends one
Mode choice                                                   needs to understand children’s travel behavior and mobility needs. In that regard, one underexplored task is if
Attitudes                                                     and how transport modes relate to children’s well-being. This study aims to evaluate the connections between
Psychological well-being
children’s subjective psychological well-being, mode use and attitudes. A sample of children from three primary
School travel
and two secondary schools in the City of Vienna reported their mood and alertness on and after school trips along
with travel mode use, preferences, and attitudes. The results showed that children’s psychological well-being was
related to the travel modes they used and their preferences and attitudes towards those modes. The association
between mode use and PWB was positive for active travel but weak. Age differences were also apparent –
younger children preferred active travel modes for school and leisure trips, while older children had more
positive attitudes and stronger preferences for car use – foreshadowing potential travel behavior changes as
children approach young adulthood and become more independent.
1. Introduction                                                                                       (Tomschy et al., 2016). With these developments, it could be related
that only 35% of Austrian young people report no physical complaints
Declining rates of physical activity are reported all over the world.                            (Knechtsberger and Schwabl, 2016).
Recent analyses across 168 countries show that the prevalence of in-                                       Low physical activity (PA) rates in connection with everyday mo-
sufficient physical activity has increased in high-income countries                                   bility likely have negative consequences for children’s psychological
(Guthold et al., 2018). Members of young age groups especially get too                                and social well-being in addition to their physical health, yet the me-
little exercise. According to World Health Organization (WHO), 83% of                                 chanisms behind these relationships have not been sufficiently ex-
pupils in Austria do not fulfil the recommendations on health-preser-                                 plored. Research on adults suggests that active mode travelers (those
ving physical activity for children and adolescents (Maier et al., 2017).                             going by foot and bicycle) tend to be happier and more satisfied with
This is in line with global estimates based on figures in 2010 indicating                             their transportation situation (De Vos et al., 2013); although, this could
that 81% of adolescents (aged 11–17 years) do not meet the WHO re-                                    be due in part to self-selection of these modes by more active people
commendations on physical activity for health (WHO, 2018). With in-                                   with positive attitudes (modal consonance) (De Vos, 2019). Results
creasing age, the children become even less active (Ramelow et al.,                                   tend to be similarly positive for children and young adults (Waygood
2015; Riddoch et al., 2004): Young people aged 14–19 spend most of                                    et al., 2017). As just one dimension of children’s overall well-being and
the day (70%) sitting and lying (Knechtsberger and Schwabl, 2016).                                    happiness, travel well-being likely influences children’s overall life sa-
Similar trends are also reflected in increasingly sedentary travel pat-                               tisfaction (Waygood et al., 2018) and may even contribute towards
terns: The share of walking trips of Austrian pupils decreased sig-                                   attentiveness in school and educational performance (Westman et al.,
nificantly from 35% to 25% between 1995 and 2014, while they are                                      2017). Thus, not only are positive experiences during a trip of interest,
being driven by car more often (from 17% of their trips to 25%)                                       but also the association of active travel and children’s emotions during
<U+204E>
Corresponding author.
E-mail address: juliane.stark@boku.ac.at (J. Stark).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2019.05.001
Received 28 November 2018; Received in revised form 1 May 2019; Accepted 2 May 2019
Available online 14 May 2019
2214-367X/ © 2019 Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
























































J. Stark, et al.
the day. Evidence of such benefits from active travel may help to
convince parents to promote active travel throughout childhood and
early adulthood.
Beyond the impacts on children’s health and well-being, life sa-
tisfaction, and cognitive performance, low levels of active travel during
childhood may have important consequences for the formation of
mode-specific attitudes and sustainable mode use later in the life
course. This is consistent with a travel socialization perspective in
which attitudes towards particular travel modes have social influences
that originate during childhood (Baslington, 2008). Children reared in
an environment where walking and bicycling to school are outside the
norm may develop more negative attitudes towards active travel or at
least be less likely to consider these modes for transportation purposes
in the future. Through negative reinforcement and habit, such children
may be more likely to adopt positive attitudes towards car use and seek
out opportunities to drive when the option arises in young adulthood.
Overall, the potential negative environmental consequences of an auto-
oriented childhood may be large when viewed from the perspective of
an entire life course. Yet, again, the complex relationships between
travel attitudes, behaviors, and well-being – especially during the early
life course – demand additional research for greater understanding.
The purpose of this paper is to explore these relationships between
children’s well-being and transport/travel attitudes and behaviors, a
topic that is underdeveloped in research literature (Waygood et al.,
2015, 2017). As we subsequently discuss in Section 2, these relation-
ships are multifaceted, and – at present – there is insufficient evidence
to ascertain directions of causality for children. Therefore, our ex-
ploratory study is based on the hypothesis that active travel on school
trips and positive attitudes towards used travel modes are positively
associated with indicators of children’s well-being. We also wish to
explore age (and gender) differences in these relationships.
In this paper, we analyze the results of in-class surveys with children
from three primary and two secondary schools in the City of Vienna
(Austria). Children reported their mood and alertness at the time of
travelling to school as well as during an early class, their travel mode
use and preferences, and their attitudes towards attributes of travel
modes. In this way, the surveys allow us to explore children’s travel-
related subjective psychological well-being and, in addition, how these
indicators of well-being are related to mode use. Furthermore, in this
context, the interconnection to children’s mode-specific attitudes is
explored, a topic which has not yet been analyzed thoroughly. Two age
groups were involved, allowing us to analyze differences in travel well-

being and attitudes between children of different ages (8–9 vs. 12–13).
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 contains a brief lit-

erature review on children’s psychological well-being; their travel-re-

lated behaviors, preferences, and attitudes; and connections between

these concepts. Section 3 presents details about the study’s method,

including the survey approach and questionnaire design. The results of

the descriptive-explorative data analysis are presented in Section 4. In

Section 5, the paper closes with an interpretation and discussion of key

findings, study limitations, and opportunities for future work.


2. Background


2.1. Children’s psychological well-being


Many studies exist in the field of (health related) quality of life of

children and adolescents (e.g. Bullinger, 2009; Bullinger and Ravens-

Sieberer, 1995; Drotar, 1998; Ravens-Sieberer, 2000). Although there

are multiple definitions and theories of quality of life – which cannot be

discussed here – our focus is on the narrower concept of well-being

from a subjective perspective (Schumacher et al., 2003;

Schwenkmezger, 1994): psychological well-being (PWB). This can also be
considered the mental/emotional state component of quality of life
(Patrick and Erickson, 1988) or the psychological domain of children’s

well-being (Pollard and Lee, 2003).

Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
Psychological (or subjective) well-being broadly encompasses af-
fective states (emotions, mood, happiness, etc.) as well as more cogni-
tive elements (satisfaction, fulfillment, etc.) (Becker, 1994; Diener,
1984, 2000). In-line with multifold concepts of well-being and quality
of life, many different methods and questionnaires exist for measuring
the multidimensional concept of PWB, for example: WHOQOL
(WHOQOL-Group, 1994), ILK Rating questionnaire (Mattejat et al.,
1998), EuroQOL (Kind, 1996); EORTC-questionnaire (Aaronson et al.,
1996), Rosenberg self-esteem scale (Rosenberg, 1965), positive and
negative affect scale (PANAS) (Watson et al., 1988), and scale of po-
sitive and negative experience (SPANE) (Diener et al., 2010). Those
scales were developed outside the transportation context. Recently,
questionnaires to measure PWB associated with travel have appeared,
including the Satisfaction with Travel Scale (STS) (e.g. Ettema et al.,
2011), the Travel Mood Scale (TMS) (Glasgow et al., 2018), and other
measures of travel affect (Singleton, 2017).
Despite this abundance of measurement tools for the adult popula-
tion, there is no standard method to assess well-being in children
(Pollard and Lee, 2003). Given the particularities of this age group –
shorter attention spans, lower reading abilities, and challenges under-
standing complex concepts (Henerson et al., 1987) – studies seeking to
quantify children’s self-reported well-being often use a small number of
visual scales, such as emotional faces or emoticons, to increase com-
prehension and make the task more enjoyable (Andrews and Whitey,
1976; Wydra, 2014). In this study, we use a similar visual method to
measure children’s self-reported current and recent mood (affective
PWB). (For an alternative approach using age-appropriate words in a
transportation context, see the STS-Children (STS-C) (Westman et al.,
2017).)
PWB is more richly viewed not in isolation. Indeed, the psycholo-
gical domain of children’s well-being can also affect and be affected by
other dimensions of well-being (Pollard and Lee, 2003; Waygood et al.,
2017), including the physical (e.g., health/safety indicators), economic
(e.g., household resources), cognitive (e.g., concentration in school and
academic achievement), and social (e.g., relationships with others)
domains. In the language of Waygood et al. (2017), our study explores
travel-related “intrinsic” influences on children’s PWB, those occurring
during or because of travel. In the next two subsections, we summarize
the limited literature on associations between children’s PWB, travel
mode use (and preferences), and travel-related attitudes.


2.2. Children’s PWB and mode use


A growing body of literature finds consistent associations between

self-reported travel-related subjective/psychological well-being or sa-

tisfaction and specific travel modes, at least among adults. In general,

walking and bicycling are rated more positively than car travel, which

in turn is frequently rated more positively than travel by public trans-

port (e.g., De Vos et al., 2013, 2016; Friman et al., 2013; Kemen, 2016;

Martin et al., 2014; Smith, 2017; St-Louis et al., 2014; Singleton, 2018).

(Such findings often persist even when controlling for travel time and
personal characteristics.) These results make sense: traveling is an ex-

periential activity (especially for a vehicle operator), and modes have
intrinsic differences (public transport use requires sharing space with

strangers1; walking and cycling occur outside and involve physical
exertion).

For children, associations between travel mode and PWB appear to

be similar in direction as for adults, but the relatively small number of

studies means that “more effort is required to replicate findings”

(Waygood et al., 2017, p. 37). In a recent integrative review, Waygood

et al. (2017) found generally (but not categorically) positive associa-

tions between PWB and active modes (walking and cycling) – including


1
This might be different for children who travel by public transport - as social
interactions can be more important for children.
119

J. Stark, et al.
more positive experiences and lower stress from walking – and negative
relations for travel by car.
Research articles published since that review find similar results
that strengthen its findings. Primary school children in Hong Kong who
walked were happier traveling home than those who used motorized
modes (Leung and Loo, 2017). Similarly, primary school children in
Quebec City rated bicycle and walking trips as better than car trips
(Waygood and Cervesato, 2017). Ratings of PWB during the first school
lesson of the day were also higher for children who used active modes
and lower for public transport users than for car passengers among
primary school students in Lower Austria (Stark et al., 2018). Among
primary and secondary students in southwest Sweden, children who
traveled to school by active modes or school bus had higher ratings of
travel satisfaction and more positive moods in the morning than did
children who traveled by car (although the differences for mood were
not significant) (Westman et al., 2017). It seems that these consistent
modal associations with PWB may persist throughout the life course.

2.3. Children’s travel-related attitudes, modal preferences, and PWB

More so for children than for adults, mode use is not the same as
mode choice: children’s travel to school is strongly shaped by parental
travel attitudes and behaviors, the built environment, and other com-
plex institutional constraints including school and legal requirements
(Mitra, 2013). Therefore, we cannot assume that the modes children use
correspond to their own modal preferences. The scarce evidence that
exists on this topic suggests that children’s modal preferences may be
shaped by fun or social factors (McDonald, 2005). Recent in-depth
studies of children’s travel suggest that they want to travel in ways that
afford them independence (from adult supervision), exploration and
informal play, and social engagement with their peers and the com-
munity (Babb et al., 2017; Depeau et al., 2017).
Children’s modal preferences are likely directly shaped by their
travel-related attitudes towards those modes; yet, again, research on
children’s travel attitudes is lacking. Several studies find connections
between (especially parental but also students’) travel-related attitudes
and children’s and teenagers’ travel mode to school (e.g., Fitch et al.,
2019; McDonald, 2012; Timperio et al., 2004; Thigpen, 2017). These
findings are consistent with psychological attitude-behavior frame-
works such as the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991).
Based on different frameworks relating attitudes to travel behaviors
and well-being (e.g., De Vos and Witlox, 2017), the interaction of
children’s travel-related attitudes and preferences with their travel
mode use is expected to influence children’s PWB. If they are able to
travel in ways they prefer, this consonance is expected to generate
travel satisfaction and positive PWB; dissonance between children’s
modal preferences and uses is expected to generate lower levels of
travel-related PWB (De Vos, 2018). Over time, cognitive dissonance
theory (Festinger, 1957) anticipates that attitudes may evolve to better
match behaviors, especially in situations such as where children’s travel
behaviors are constrained. In a study of teenagers in Stockholm, ado-
lescents’ attitudes towards car use and ownership were more positive
for those in car-owning vs. car-free households (Sandqvist, 2002).
Changes in travel attitudes as children age into adolescence and
adulthood may also shape travel behaviors and PWB, yet longitudinal
studies are rare. There is some evidence that adolescents have less
positive attitudes towards car ownership than their parents (ibid.) and
that younger generations (millennials) have less positive attitudes to-
wards driver licensure (Thigpen, 2017).

2.4. Purpose of this study

The present study examines relations between children’s mode use
on school trips, attitudes and PWB. Given the complexity of these po-
tential relationships and the relative lack of empirical evidence for
children’s travel, our study is exploratory in nature. Yet, it draws upon

Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
existing frameworks explaining relationships between adult travel be-
havior, well-being, and travel attitudes. In particular, De Vos and
Witlox (2017) review literature on travel satisfaction – which is closely
related to our focus, psychological well-being – and propose a con-
ceptual framework (ibid., p. 369). The relevant parts of the conceptual
framework suggest that both travel mode choice and travel-related at-
titudes influence trip satisfaction, which in turn affects satisfaction with
the activity at the destination. Given that children and adolescents have
less agency over their choices of travel modes, we would also include
another element: consonance between mode use and modal preference.
Consonance (dissonance) could have a positive (negative) link with
travel well-being, either directly or indirectly by mediating the link
with travel attitudes. Based on research on children’s travel and well-
being summarized above and on the De Vos and Witlox (2017) fra-
mework, we hypothesize that active travel on school trips and positive
attitudes towards used travel modes are positively associated with in-
dicators of children’s well-being, and that these associations may be
stronger for PWB of the journey to school than PWB when in class. We
also expect that some of these relationships will be different for older
and younger children, particularly around attitudes and preferences
towards the car.

3. Methods

The study was part of an Austrian educational project (2016–2018)
to foster cooperation between schools and research institutes, in order
to interest children and adolescents in science and technology, research
and development. Thus, the project was not primarily concerned with
the relationships between travel behavior, PWB and attitudes; however,
we collected some data during workshops in primary and secondary
school children to assess their physical mobility preferences in general,
attitudes towards travel modes and their subjective PWB related to
school travel. The children’s participation in the survey was secured by
obtaining parents’ written declarations of consent and information
sheets. There was no case that parents did not gave permissions for their
child’s participation. All project activities took part in the presence of
teachers and during lesson times while respecting break times to avoid
limiting children’s playtimes. The project activities were also supported
by the relevant administrative school authorities as well as parents’
associations and principals of the school involved.

3.1. Survey design and participants

As part of the introductory portion of the project, we conducted a
mobility and attitude survey in November 2016 at five schools in the
city of Vienna: three were primary schools, while the other two were
secondary schools. The school locations were situated in the 21st dis-
trict of Vienna, within a radius of about 6 km straight-line distance.
Therefore, they were quite similar with regard to geographical setting
and public transport supply: All of them had high quality tram and bus
connections that fed the metro lines. One class per school took part in
the surveys. At the time of the survey, the children of the primary
schools were 8 to 9 years old (3rd grade), and the children in the sec-
ondary schools were 12 to 13 years old (7th grade) – the mean age was
9.9. In total, 129 children took part (44.2% female). Table 1 gives an
overview of key figures of the surveys.
Each paper-and-pencil survey was carried out at the beginning of a
workshop, which started in the first school lesson in the morning. The
questionnaires were handed out in class. Children were asked to fill in
the questionnaires and were made aware that their attendance is vo-
luntary. It was also pointed out that this is no class test. Children were
supervised while filling in the questionnaire by researchers and tea-
chers. Although the children were quite used to fill in worksheets and
were looking forward to filling in the questionnaire, we went through
the questionnaire point for point conjointly. If some children turned out
to need additional support, for example because of lower writing speed,
120

J. Stark, et al.
Table 1
Key figures of the surveys.
1                         2
Basic data …
Period of data collection November 2016
Location                  5 schools, City of Vienna
Target groups             Primary school children      Secondary school children

N                         83                           46
Mean age                  8.5                          12.5
Survey design             Self-administered questionnaire with supervision, PAPI
Content with regard to …
… Mobility behavior       Frequency of mode choice (ST/LT), independent mobility


(freedom of choice)


… PWB                     Subjective PWB (on the way, at time of reporting)
… Attitudes               Attitudes related to travel modes, preferences (ST/LT)
Other                     Career aspiration, attitudes towards technical jobs,
perception of the environment*


Notes: * only sub-group (N = 26 secondary school children); PAPI – paper and
pencil interview, PWB – psychological well-being, ST – school trip, LT – leisure
trip.

sub-groups were formed with support by a researcher; this approach
has proven very successful. This was only necessary for the primary
school children. Considerable importance was attached to instructions
on the scales used in the questionnaire. The self-completion ques-
tionnaire mainly dealt with the topics of travel behavior, mobility-re-
lated attitudes, the children’s view of technical professions, and their
ideas for the future. In the following, only relevant parts of the ques-
tionnaire are addressed.


3.2. Questionnaire

Teachers participated in the design process of the questionnaire to
ensure its suitability for the two age groups in this study. We used
pictograms of travel modes, emoticons and simple wording. In addition,
examples were provided on how to mark the answers correctly. To
assure comparability, the same questionnaire was used for both age
groups.
Firstly, children stated the travel mode used for their way to school
in the morning on the reporting date. Then, children reported their
subjective well-being – actual and experienced while travelling – using
a 5-point scale with mood icons following the approach from Westman
et al. (2013). In doing so, children reported (i) their affective state2 on
their way to school this morning (t1) [very good mood, good mood,
average, bad mood, very bad mood] as well as (ii) their experienced
alertness [very chipper, chipper, average, tired, very tired]. Then, children
reported their current (in class) (t2) subjective well-being using the
same questions and icons. In contrast to Westman et al. (2013), we used
very expressive mood icons and a keyword for each icon (Fig. 1) be-
cause, in a pre-test with a small group of children, children preferred to
have one keyword per smiley instead of a lonely description of end-
points. They reported to look at the “text” or “text and icons”, but not
only at the icons. They also preferred to have a visual accentuation of
the lines (instead of columns and lines).
To get an impression of the children’s general travel behavior,
children also reported the frequency of travel mode use on school and
leisure trips3 [(nearly) always, frequently, sometimes, (nearly) never] for
each given travel mode [car passenger, bus/train, scooter, bicycle,
walking]. Further, their individual preferences of travel modes on school

2
A distinction between “mood” and “emotion” is not made here. Following

the definition that emotions are “specific states generated in reaction to certain
events or appraisals” (Stuart and Biddle, 2008, p.166), our questions at t1 may
be more about emotions during travel, while our questions at t2 may be more
about mood at school. Both could be affected by travel.
3
The analogous translation of the questions was “How often do you use the
following travel modes on your school / leisure trips?”.
1
Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
trips and leisure trips were surveyed. Their attitudes with regard to the
given travel modes were assessed using a 4-point scale with smileys and
a keyword. We included several different content-related dimensions of
travel mode attitudes based on the assumption that overall attitudes
towards travel modes are determined by subjective evaluations of at-
tributes associated with the travel modes:

• Image [really cool, good, average, uncool],


• Health [very healthy, healthy, unhealthy, very unhealthy],


• Effects on the environment [very environmentally friendly,                  en-
vironmentally friendly, environmentally unfriendly, very en-

vironmentally unfriendly],
•

Social aspects – possibility to converse with others [very good, good,
bad, very bad], and

•  Safety [very safe, safe, unsafe, very unsafe] without any further spe-
cifications with regard to traffic safety and personal security.


In that sense, we collected subjective evaluations only excluding the
subjective belief-values (strength or importance of these associations),
because respondents often intuitively assign high value in self-reports of
belief-expectancies (see e.g., French and Hankins, 2003; Chan et al.
2015).
Further questions referred to the children’s perception of the en-
vironment, their freedom on mode choice and not transport-related
questions and are not described here. As outlined before, the survey
described here was not the main topic of the project. Therefore, except
for gender and age group, household characteristics and other de-
terminants of mode choice are not included in the following analysis
due to lack of data.

3.3. Data analysis

The data collected were analyzed using descriptive methods.
Bivariate relationships between children’s well-being, travel mode use,
and related attitudes were used to examine the self-reported data. As it
is also important to understand whether there are gender or age dif-
ferences in everyday experiences, group comparisons between the two
age groups and boys and girls were conducted. As the sample size is
quite low for some of the analyzes and unbalanced for the two age
groups, interpretations are always in regard to the project and the
studied target group.

4. Results

The results of the descriptive-exploratory analyses of mode choice
and preferences, psychological well-being, and travel-related attitudes
are described in the following subsections.

4.1. Modal split and preferences

The first column in each section of Fig. 2 shows the modal split for
trips to school (ST) on the reported date by age group (“ST used”). In
the Figure, the sum of shares of active travel modes (walking, scooter,
cycling) is provided on the top of each bar. Due to small sample sizes,
we had to aggregate the use of scooter (1.6%), bicycle (0.8%) and
walking (33.1%) into one category (active travel). The bicycle seems to
be not important for school trips. In terms of leisure trips, the reported
general frequency of mode use reveals that the bicycle is more relevant
but still on low level (Table A-2). The low share of bicycle trips stems
most probably from: (i) the time of the survey (November), (ii) the good

supply of public transport at the school locations, and (iii) the high

share of primary school children in the sample (in Austria, children are
not allowed to go by bicycle on their own before the age of 12 or 9 if
they pass a cycling exam).

Overall, the results reveal a high share of public transport (42.6%)
on school trips, followed by the use of active travel modes (35.4%) and
21

J. Stark, et al.                                                                                                               Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
very good mood                  good mode                        average                    bad mood                   very bad mood
very chipper                    chipper                        average                       tired                      very tired
Fig. 1. Mood icons for affective state (top) and alertness (bottom).
Fig. 3. Consonance and dissonance of mode use for school travel (actual versus
preferred), by age group (age group 1 – primary school children; age group 2 –
Fig. 2. Modal split based on (i) travel modes used on the reported day for the
secondary school children).
trip to school (ST used), (ii) travel modes preferred for school trips (ST pref) and
(iii) for leisure trips (LT pref), dependent on age group (age group 1 – primary
school children; age group 2 – secondary school children), absolute numbers              highest rate of consonance is within the active travel modes (Fig. 3).
see Table A-3.                                                                                During the survey, it was evident that primary school children had
difficulties to commit themselves to one preferred travel mode, parti-
car use as a passenger (22.0%). We also checked “today’s travel mode                     cularly when it comes to leisure trips. It seemed that they kept their real
use” against the reported general frequency of travel mode use on                        decision making processes in sight. Thus, they often wanted to report
school trips and found high confirmation rates (75% to 100% under                        their “first, second and third” favorite travel mode. This was also re-
consideration of the answers “(nearly) always or frequent” use). This                    flected in the data: It is notable that younger children wanted to switch
means that the self-reported mode choice seems to be plausible for the                   within active travel modes (almost exclusively from walking to bicycle
children’s general school travel.                                                        or from walking to scooter). This did not apply to the older ones whose
Whereas no significant differences in terms of gender or school site                desired modal shift on school trips primarily concerns public transport
were found, age did matter: older children (age group 2) used public                     to car or to bicycle in case of dissonance.
transport more often than younger children (age group 1) did – at the
expense of active travel modes (mainly walking) (<U+03C7>2(2) = 23.166,
4.2. Psychological well-being
p = 0.000). Presumably, this is because secondary school children had
longer average trip distances (2.1 km) than primary school children
The items of psychological well-being (PWB) were encoded by using
(1.5 km). The share of car use as a passenger is quite similar for the two
higher values for better well-being: Thus, positive endpoints (very good
age groups. In the sample, as expected, longer trip distances enhance
mood/very chipper) refer to 5 and negative endpoints (very bad mood/
car use. Although the share of active travel is not very high in age group
very tired) to 1. Table 2 gives an overview of the subjective well-being
2 (11.1%), we did not exclude these children from the analysis.
However, this should be considered in the interpretation of the results.
Table 2
An analysis of children’s modal preferences for school trips (“ST
Mean values of indicators of affective state and alertness, five-point scale (1 –
pref”) and leisure trips (“LT pref”) (the last two columns in each section               very bad mood/very tired to 5 – very good mood/very chipper).
in Fig. 2) showed that – independent from age – the share of active
1      2      3               4                    5                     6
travel modes could be much higher than the actual modal split. For
PWB    Time   All (N = 129)   Age group 1          Age group 2           p-value1
young children, the active travel mode share increases from 48.8%                                                        (N = 83)             (N = 46)
(used on school trips) up to 68.3% (preferred) on leisure trips; most of
this shift comes at the expense of public transport. Older children would                  AF     t1     3.82            3.96                 3.54                  0.016
also prefer to travel actively (11.1% reported, 40.0–45.5% preferred)                      AF     t2     4.07            4.14                 3.95                  0.115
AL     t1     3.18            3.40                 2.77                  0.014
but also seem to have a high affinity for car use (~45%).                                  AL     t2     3.49            3.46                 3.56                  0.618
An individual-based analysis revealed 49.6% dissonance between
reported and preferred travel modes on school trips if a “shift” within                  Note: AF – Affective state, AL – Alertness, t1 – on the way to school, t2 – time of
active travel modes (for example scooter used, bicycle preferred) is                     reporting. Age group 1 – primary school children; age group 2 – secondary
neglected. Dissonance was much lower among younger children                              school children.
1
(35.4%) than among older ones (75.6%). For both age groups, the                               Asymp. significance (2-tailed), sign. level 0.05 sign. level Bonferroni cor-
rected 0.025; Mann-Whitney-U test,
122


























































J. Stark, et al.
showing average positive levels in terms of affective state (AF) and
average assessments in terms of alertness (AL). According to the chil-
dren’s self-reports, PWB-levels were rated higher at the moment of
completion of the questionnaire (t2) than earlier on the way to school
(t1). As outlined in chapter 3.2 the affective state as well as alertness
were surveyed for two points in time.
We tested for differences in gender and age group using Mann-
Whitney-U-tests and a Bonferroni-corrected significance level based on
acorr = 0.1/m where m is the number of null hypotheses. Whereas no
relationship with regard to gender was found, the two age groups
showed differences: Overall, younger children (age group 1) felt sig-
nificantly better on their way to school than the older ones (age group
2) (U = 1,252.500, z = -2.398, p = .016 < acorr = 0.025 for affective
state; U = 1,336.5, z = -2.450, p = .014 < acorr = 0.025 for alert-
ness). However, the effect size for both variables corresponds to a weak
effect (r = 0.22) according to Cohen (1992). There also seems to be a
weak association of consonance vs. dissonance of mode use with PWB:
In case of consonance (travel mode used on the school trips corresponds
to the preferred travel mode), children had a significantly higher well-
being (U = 1,568.000, z = -2.039, p = .041 < acorr = 0.025,
r = 0.18), particularly for feelings of alertness (U = 1,469.500,
z = -2.440, p = .015 < acorr = 0.025, r = 0.22). No association with
home-to-school distances could be found.

4.3. Travel modes used on school trips and children’s well-being

Next, we related PWB-assessments to the travel mode children used
in the morning (Table A-1). Although, in general, active travelers in the
morning had higher assessments of subjective PWB than those who
traveled by car, no significant modal differences could be verified.
Correlations among indicators of affective state and alertness at
different times (on the way to school vs. at the time of reporting) are
displayed in Table A-2 (columns 4–6). PWB indicators regarding the
school trip were moderately correlated with the same indicators mea-
sured during class. Being in a good mood does not, however, auto-
matically mean that children feel attentive and awake. Although there
is a tendency of a coherence between active travel and well-being –
especially when children were on their way to school – the tests did not
reveal any significant correlation.
Test of gender differences show a medium association: girls were
significant happier p < 0.05 on their way (AFt1) than boys when they
travelled by car (Mann-Whitney-U test: U = 48.500, p = .038,
r = 0.41) (Table A-4); based on Bonferroni correction of the sig-
nificance level (acorr = 0.025), the result is insignificant. No significant
differences with regard to affective state or alertness were observed in
terms of gender, age group or consonance. Sample sizes are, however,
low. These findings contrast with results from Westman et al. (2013) in
Sweden who found that girls who travelled by car reported a lower
degree of activation during travel than boys; this did not refer to va-
lence.


4.4. Travel-related attitudes and well-being

Attitudes towards travel modes may have an influence on the per-
ception of well-being on the way to school.4 They may trigger emotions
associated with travelling. From our point of view, a positive attitude
towards a travel mode could also be the consequence of positive eval-
uated travel experiences (over time) expressed in high levels of PWB
(reverse relationships). However, one could also argue that our in-
dicators of well-being and attitudes are very similar. Nevertheless, we

4
Of course, especially, as children do not have the same degree of freedom to
choose travel modes compared with adults, their attitudes are highly influenced
by their parents, teachers or other reference persons. For older children, peer-
group influences become more and more important (Bastian, 2010).

Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
understand that they can mutually influence each other, and that atti-
tudes towards objects or events refer to more stable subjective eva-
luations than current mental states like emotions do (Scherer, 2005).
Although the distinction between the two PWB-indicators and attitudes
towards travel modes is somewhat fuzzy, we analyzed their interaction.
In a first step, a descriptive analysis was conducted for children’s
attitudes towards different travel modes. From the results it emerged
that they assessed walking as a very healthy, environmentally friendly
mode which offers good possibilities for conversation. Overall, bicy-
cling/scooter also ranked high on environmental friendliness and
health but slightly lower on conversation. Travel by car scored higher
than other modes in terms of image, but car and public transport had
low ratings for health and the environment. Taking the mean of all five
attitudes and comparing across modes (Table A-4), walking was rated
highest, followed by bicycle/scooter, car, and public transport. Younger
children rated cycling, scooter and public transport higher than older
ones. However, significant differences can only be found for scooter
(Mann-Whitney-U-Test: U = 1,371.000, z = -2.659, p = .008 <
acorr = 0.025). Some gender differences were found based on analyses
of the whole sample: males rated cycling and walking higher (Mann-
Whitney-U-Test for cycling: U = 1452.000, p = .006 < acorr = 0.025;
effect size r = 0.24; Walking: U = 1535.500, p = .019; effect size
r = 0.21). The effect sizes, however, can be considered rather low for
both cases (Cohen, 1992).
We found significant age group differences in individual mode-
specific attitudes (Fig. 4, Table A-2). Bicycles and scooters were less-
frequently seen as “cool” or “good for conversation” by older children
as compared to younger children. Older children also rated cars and
public transport modes much more critically than younger children on
the health and environment dimensions. Bicycling and walking were
perceived as slightly healthier and more environmentally friendly (re-
spectively) among older children.
In a second step, the average scores over all travel-related attitude
dimensions – segmented by travel mode – were put in relation to the
indicators of well-being. We formed two groups of children: those who
travelled by car as a passenger in the morning at the reporting date, and
those who travelled actively (on foot or by bicycle/scooter). In the re-
sults regarding car passengers (Table A-6), the Spearman correlation
between affective state on the way (t1) and attitude towards car was
0.37, p = .050 (t2: rS = 0.37, p = .061); the relationship with attitude
toward public transport was also significant and positive. No significant
positive association between alertness and car-attitude was found. In
terms of active travel (mainly walking) (Table A-7), the bivariate cor-
relation between affective state on the way (t1) and attitudes towards
walking was significant and positive (rS = 0.36, p = .018; for t2:
rS = 0.15, p = .331). This correlation increases if only children are se-
lected who are consistent within chosen and preferred travel mode
(rS = 0.40, p = .013; for t2: rS = 0.20, p = .252). Positive correlations
towards arousal rS = 0.27 and 0.26 (t1 and t2) were also found, but
these were marginally outside the level of significance. Consonance did
not matter in this case.
It should be noted, when the detailed attitudinal dimensions to-
wards walking were considered in relation to well-being (results not
shown), the “coolness” of walking showed highly significant positive
correlations with PWB indicators, in particular with alertness. Children
rating the social component of walking highly were in a better mood
but not more alert. Of course, due to a small sample size these results
should be interpreted with caution.

5. Summary and discussion

In this study, we explored a relatively uncharted field of research

about the relationships between children’s psychological well-being,
travel behavior (mode use and preferences), and mode-specific atti-
tudes. In general, our results confirmed the hypothesized positive as-
sociations – based on the framework from De Vos and Witlox (2017) –
123

J. Stark, et al.
Fig. 4. Children’s travel-r
between active travel and PWB and between travel attitudes and PWB.
We also examined gender and age differences amidst these relationships
and tried to explore the impact of dissonance/consonance of mode use
and preference. Our descriptive-exploratory analyses relied upon self-
report questionnaires administered to over 100 primary and secondary
school children in the City of Vienna. Psychological well-being for the
trip to school and while in class were measured using five-point scales
with facial mood icons asking about mood (overall affective state) and
alertness, while mode-specific attitudes along five dimensions were
measured using four-point scales. As we summarize and interpret in the
following paragraphs, our study generated relevant findings that offer
contributions to research in several areas, including understanding
travel-related influences on children’s psychological well-being and
reasons for evolving travel mode preferences and attitudes as children
age towards adulthood.
This study supports our hypothesis of a relationship between travel
mode and well-being among children. As expected, active mode users
had slightly more positive moods during the trip to school and when in
class, but the difference was not statistically significant. Taken along-
side previous evidence in the literature (e.g., Leung and Loo, 2017;
Stark et al., 2018; Waygood et al., 2017; Westman et al., 2017), these
results suggest that travel might affect children’s well-being and that
physically-active travel may help to generate more positive affect, al-
though perhaps modestly so. Given a larger sample size, our study may
have had the power to make the relationships we found more statisti-
cally significant.
We also found evidence that children’s travel-related attitudes and
modal preferences are also connected to their sensations of well-being,
particularly for children’s moods on the way to school. (Similar but less
significant tendencies were observed for children’s post-travel, in-class
affective state.) Car users’ overall attitudes towards the car (and public
transport) were positively associated with mood on the way to school;
similarly, overall attitudes towards walking for active mode users (who
mostly walked to school) were also positively associated with affective
states for the school trip. In this regard, (consonant) children who used
their preferred travel mode had an even stronger relationship between
walking attitudes and affective state. Looking at walking attitudes and
PWB in more detail, alertness was positively associated with image
(“coolness”), while mood was positively associated with the ability to
converse. Also, younger children had more positive affective states and
were more alert than older children on the way to school, but there
were no age differences for PWB indicators when measured in class.
This result could potentially be explained by a greater attitude-behavior
gap for older children: they were less likely to have used their preferred
mode to school. The cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957) between
preferred and used travel mode may have led to reduced well-being (De
Vos, 2018). Overall, it appears that travel mode attitudes (and gaps

Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
elated attitudes by age group, N = 129.
between modal preferences and use) are positively (and negatively)
associated with the well-being of children, as anticipated. However, as
these are correlational data, results should be interpreted very cau-
tiously; no detailed conclusions can be drawn about the causality be-
tween these variables.
By surveying and comparing children at two stages in their pre-
adult life course (younger children in primary school (3rd grade, ages
8–9) vs. older children in secondary school (7th grade, ages 12–13), we
were able to highlight important changes in modal preferences that
could foreshadow travel behaviors during young adulthood. Compared
to younger children, there was much greater (nearly double) interest in
the car and a much smaller (less than half) interest in the scooter and a
slightly smaller interest in walking for older children; preferences for
bicycling and the small preference for public transport stayed roughly
the same. This corresponds to findings from Flade and Limbourg
(1997), who state that children’s orientation towards the car seems to
intensify with ongoing age. These age differences in modal preferences
show an increasing affinity for car use as children age towards adult-
hood. As children gain life experience and move into adolescence, there
seems to be a growing interest in perhaps more comfortable and serious
“adult” modes like the car and a declining interest in more fun “child-
like” modes such as the scooter and walking. Once given more au-
tonomy over their own mode choices, the future young adults in our
study may abandon more healthy and sustainable mode choices
(walking, public transport) for cars.
Although for many children mode use may not be much of a
“choice” – and is perhaps more a reflection of parental and institutional
preferences and constraints – a comparison between the modes used
and the modes preferred to be used for school trips suggests a widening
gap as children age. If all children in our study could travel by their
preferred modes, then there would be more bicycle use among younger
and older children. (These preferences are in line with other studies on
this age group (e.g., Zwerts et al., 2010)). This discrepancy could reflect
constraints imposed by the longer trips to secondary school locations;
however, on average trips are not that much longer (0.6 km or 40%)
than for primary school and still within a reasonable bicycling distance
(2.1 km), which suggests that other barriers to bicycling (e.g., infra-
structure, ability to converse, image) are at play. Also, we have already
discussed how this increased travel mode dissonance could be a cause
of reduced levels of PWB for older children. According to Festinger’s
(1957) cognitive dissonance theory, one way that people try to reduce
the discomfort (low PWB) resulting from a discrepancy between an
attitude and a related behavior is by changing the attitude to fit the
behavior. Thus, an inability to bicycle may lead (over time) to more
negative attitudes towards bicycling, which was the case for two of the
attitude dimensions in our study.
Our investigation into travel-related attitudes towards specific
124

J. Stark, et al.
modes reveals potential explanations for these shifting modal pre-
ferences as children grow older. Overall, attitudes towards active modes
(walking, then bicycle/scooter) were more positive than for car and
especially than for public transport. In particular, younger children
rated cycling, scooter and public transport more positive. A deeper look
into the mode-specific attitude dimensions revealed the following sig-
nificant age differences: Specifically, older children viewed the bicycle
and scooter as being not as “cool” nor as good for conversation as did
younger children. Whereas the image of all modes were rated roughly
equal among younger children, the car stood out as the most “cool”
mode among older children. (This parallels the trend of increasing
modal preference for car use with higher age.) Perhaps this increasing
affinity for the car reflects a growing concern for image and social
status as children age, or perhaps older children are seeking validation
of their maturity in forms of mobility that are only attainable at a later
life stage. At the same time, older children demonstrated a significantly
improved ability to understand the health and environmental impacts
of different travel modes, rating bicycling and walking slightly higher
and both public transport and especially cars as much lower on these
attributes. With greater knowledge and experience, older children ap-
pear to be more aware of the negative health and environmental im-
pacts of motor vehicle travel.
Overall, our results paint a picture in which children’s psychological
well-being is associated with the travel modes they use, their attitudes
towards those modes, and the interaction of modal attitudes and usage.
Any discrepancies between the modes children want to and can use
could also lead to the formation of more negative mode-specific atti-
tudes, potentially affecting future mode use. However, these relation-
ships are complex and directions of effect may not be clear (De Vos,
2019). Due to the small sample and cross-sectional nature of our study,
we are unable to definitively conclude about directions of causality
between children’s psychological well-being, their travel-related atti-
tudes, and their travel mode preferences and behaviors. Our results
should be interpreted cautiously and in relation to other research on
these topics.
Nevertheless, our study’s findings inform policies aimed at in-
creasing children’s physical activity and use of sustainable modes as
they age into young adulthood. Overall, results suggest that the pre-
teen/early-teen years are a formative period for the development of
pro-car preferences and attitudes among children and young adults.
While these trends are somewhat discouraging for sustainable travel,
they also highlight opportunities for interventions. Even among older
children, some attitudes towards and preferences for bicycling remain
high, but constraints limit children’s ability to cycle to school.
Comprehensive bicycle promotion programs and efforts (Pucher and
Buehler, 2008) in primary school could unlock the latent demand for
cycling, helping to increase bicycle mode shares to school, maintain
attitudes towards bicycling, and create a culture in which cycling to
school is normal and bicycle social norms are supported into young
adulthood and even beyond. (However, such efforts may have to make
bicycling seem “cool” to older children without appearing to explicitly
do so.) Another opportunity is to take advantage of older children’s
increased knowledge of the health and environmental consequences of
various modes. Perhaps strategies designed to appeal to some children’s
and young adults’ desires to help other people and improve the world
could generate stronger intrinsic motivations for walking and bicycling,
which are more effective at sustaining behavior changes than extrinsic
motivations (Ryan and Deci, 2000). These strategies are consistent with
a travel socialization perspective in which travel mode attitudes (such
as towards the car) originate in childhood and can be addressed
through social influences (Baslington, 2008).

Travel Behaviour and Society 16 (2019) 118–130
5.1. Limitations and future work

There are some limitations of our study. First, most children did not
use the bicycle, which would presumably be more “activating” than
walking and therefore could lead to higher levels of well-being. Second,
the study presented here focused on school trips only. Westman et al.
(2013) found that children’s experience of every-day travel varies de-
pending on where they are going; experiences during the school journey
tend elicit a lower degree of valence and alertness. Third, from a
methodological point of view, it should be noted that the PWB assess-
ments are partly based on retrospective reports, so there is a chance of
memory distortion; although, the questionnaires were filled in the
morning shortly after arriving at school. Fourth, our PWB indicators
captured just a few dimensions of well-being (mood and alertness);
additional dimensions (Friman et al., 2018) may have been able to
paint a fuller picture of the various influences on children’s well-being.
Fifth, we would have preferred to use mobility and activity data in
connection with well-being of the children based on one-day or multi-
day travel diaries. Due to response burdens and a different focus of the
embedding project, these surveys were not possible. Sixth, further
variables with regard to the built environment, household character-
istics (e.g. availability of vehicles), psychosocial factors such as parental
concerns, and interrelations between parents’ travel mode to work and
parents’ attitudes towards different travel modes were not included in
the analysis due to a lack of data, although they may have an impact on
the use of active travel modes (e.g., Deka, 2013; De Vos et al., 2013;
Flade, 1994; Kalwitzki, 1994; Lopes et al., 2014; Stark et al., 2018).
Seventh, our study utilized a relatively small sample of convenience in
which the study of relationships between travel mode use, preference,
and attitudes was not the primary focus. Research designed specifically
for this purpose may be able to obtain a larger (and more balanced in
terms of group size) sample, potentially increasing the power to detect
significant associations and group differences. A larger sample size may
also facilitate a more complex multivariate analysis – rather than the
two- and three-way associations analyzed herein – that can account for
multiple influences simultaneously. This would also allow drawing
more general conclusions about the target groups.
The aspect of travel-related psychological well-being of children
appears to be underrepresented within the larger context of research on
benefits of active travel, especially given how widely this topic is stu-
died elsewhere. Given the limitations of our current study expressed
above, further research would help to direct how to integrate con-
siderations of well-being into travel behavior and transportation plan-
ning models as well as in the evaluation of transport projects. As
mentioned, our design did not allow for inferences of causality.
Therefore, the bidirectional relationships between attitudes and PWB
(and behavior and PWB) should be analyzed based on representative
datasets to derive an overall conceptual framework. It would also be
useful to gain a better understanding of the demarcation of attitudes
and well-being. When it comes to convincing adults of the benefits of
active mobility, it would be interesting to examine effects beyond PWB,
including the cognitive educational performance of children. More
practically, qualitative research on the efficacy of faces scales for (dif-
ferent dimensions of) children’s well-being and the subjective inter-
pretation of questions in this field would be very helpful for the design
of future survey instruments. Also, further research with a larger het-
erogeneous sample – that should include non-school trips – may provide
more information on gender and age-related impacts. Finally, long-
itudinal research following students as they progress through childhood
and become young adults (and beyond) would be valuable for vali-
dating the causal frameworks posited by this and other articles.
125
