

Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Transport & Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jth
Why do teens abandon bicycling? A retrospective look at attitudes
and behaviors
Sarah K. Underwood a, Susan L. Handy b,n, Debora A. Paterniti c, Amy E. Lee b
a
Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
b
Department of Environmental Science and Policy, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
c
Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Healthcare Policy and Research, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
art ic l e i nf o                                       a b s t r a c t
Article history:                                        Bicycling as a form of “active travel” is an easy way to integrate physical activity into daily life, with many
Received 9 April 2013                                   bene<U+FB01>ts for health. Yet this potential is largely untapped in the U.S., where less than 1% of workers
Accepted 11 December 2013                               commute by bicycle. The problem may start as early as childhood, given a steep decline in bicycling to
Available online 18 January 2014
school among children in the U.S., particularly among high school students. This paper examines
Keywords:                                               childhood and teenage experiences with and attitudes towards bicycling as seen in retrospect from
Bicycling                                               adulthood. The results are drawn from a larger study that set out to explore the effect of experiences
Cycling                                                 throughout life on the formation of attitudes towards bicycling. Fifty-four adult participants responded to
Teen                                                    open-ended interview questions regarding their bicycling experiences throughout their life course,
Adolescent
starting from childhood. Results show that the way in which participants thought about bicycling
Attitudes
changed from elementary school to high school, leading to decreased bicycling in teenage years and
Stigma
Qualitative                                             in<U+FB02>uencing attitudes and behavior as adults. High school students, especially females, were particularly
sensitive to negative images associated with bicycling. The strong in<U+FB02>uence of social norms has
important implications for policy.
& 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserv
1. Introduction                                                                             could in part stem from unpleasant bicycling experiences in childhood,
assuming any experience with bicycling at all. Indeed, the share of
Bicycling as a form of “active travel” is an easy way to integrate                     children (from kindergarten through grade 8) walking or bicycling
physical activity into a person0 s daily life, thereby helping to                           to school dropped from 47.7% in 1969 to 10.7% in 2009, with
reduce the risk of heart disease, improve mental health, lower                              bicycling accounting for just 1.1% of school trips in that year
blood pressure, and reduce risk of overweight and obesity (Frank                            (McDonald et al., 2011). Bicycling declined signi<U+FB01>cantly from
et al., 2004). Riding a bicycle can raise the heart rate suf<U+FB01>ciently to                     1969 to 2001 at the high school level, mirrored by an increase in
improve cardiovascular <U+FB01>tness, which is linked to improved health                           driving to school (McDonald, 2007).
outcomes for both young people and adults (Cooper et al., 2008;                                 To explore these potential connections, we examine childhood and
Hamer and Chida, 2008; Shephard, 2008; de Geus, Joncheere et al.,                           teenage experiences with and attitudes towards bicycling as seen in
2009). The potential for bicycling to increase overall physical                             retrospect from adulthood. The results presented here are drawn from
activity is especially important at a time when the prevalence of                           a larger study that set out to investigate the effect of experiences
obesity has increased signi<U+FB01>cantly in the United States and world-                          throughout life on the formation of attitudes towards bicycling. Fifty-
wide (World Health Organization, 2011; Centers for Disease Control                          four adults living in Davis, California participated in semi-structured
and Prevention, 2010; Withrow and Alter, 2011).                                             interviews regarding their bicycling experiences throughout their life
Yet this potential is largely untapped in the U.S., where less                         course, starting from childhood. Our analysis of these interviews
than 1% of workers commute by bicycle (Pucher and Buehler,                                  shows that the way in which participants viewed bicycling changed
2010). The problem may start as early as childhood. It appears that                         over the course of their youth, leading to decreased bicycling as
children living in bicycle-friendly countries, where bicycling levels                       teenagers and in<U+FB02>uencing attitudes and behavior as adults.
increase over the course of childhood, are more likely to become
bicycling adults (Pucher and Buehler, 2008). If so, the converse
may also be true: the low level of bicycling among adults in the U.S.                       2. Background
An attitude is “an evaluative response to some object which
n
Corresponding author. Tel.: þ 1 530 752 5878.                                          disposes a person to behave in a certain way toward it” (Ajzen,
E-mail address: slhandy@ucdavis.edu (S.L. Handy).                                      1991). Attitude formation is complex, and varies over time, across
2214-1405/$ - see front matter & 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2013.12.002































ed.





























18                                                 S.K. Underwood et al. / Journal of
situations, and according to individual experiences (Krosnik et al.,
2005). Social psychologists suggest that attitudes are formed
through a combination of socialization experiences and cultural
in<U+FB02>uences, and people may be highly conscious of their attitudes
toward an object, or their attitudes may be completely outside of
their awareness (Albarracin et al., 2005; Devos, 2008).
Previous work has established the important role that attitudes
play in shaping decisions about daily travel (Fujii and Kitamura,
2003; Sunkanapalli et al., 2003; Parkany et al., 2005; Johansson et
al., 2006; Beirão and Sars<U+FB01>eld Cabral, 2007; Domarchi et al., 2008).
Several studies document the importance of attitudes in explain-
ing bicycling behavior in particular. For example, a study from the
Netherlands found that a positive attitude toward bicycling was
positively associated with bicycle commuting (Heinen et al., 2011).
Similarly, a study in Davis, California, renowned for its extensive
bicycle infrastructure and otherwise supportive bicycling condi-
tions, found a strong connection between “liking biking” and both
bicycle ownership and regular bicycle use, as well as bicycle
commuting (Handy et al., 2010)). Positive attitudes towards
bicycling were also found to be important predictors of bicycle
commuting in Portland (Dill and Voros, 2007). Jensen (2008)
concluded that attitudes are an important factor in mode choice
among children in Denmark.
Although few studies focus on the formation of these attitudes,
those that do suggest an important role for social factors.
A seminal report by Davies et al. (1997) found that attitudes towards
bicycling in the UK are in<U+FB02>uenced by life stage, gender, peer
pressure, societal norms, and other factors. Pucher et al. (1999)
pointed out an inherent relationship between the “public image”
of bicycling and the general attitude toward bicycling within a
particular country or region. More recently, a study in the UK
found that those who use a bicycle are likely to have a more

positive view of a typical bicyclist than those who do not bicycle

(Gatersleben and Haddad, 2010). Similarly, the Safe Routes to
School National Partnership (2011) states that, “Bicycling may
have the stigma, similar to riding the city bus, of being something
that only the desperate use, or only a sport for middle class white

males, or even the symbol of gentri<U+FB01>cation in some communities.”

Steinbach et al. (2011) suggest that the meaning people give to
bicycling might resonate differently across gender, ethnic, and
class identities. Aldred (2012) takes this idea further in her
discussion of “cyclist identities” and the many forms of stigma

associated with bicycling in the UK. In other words, individual
attitudes toward bicycling are inextricably linked to bicycling
image and community norms.
The few studies that focus on teenagers and bicycling suggest

that image plays an especially important role at this stage of life.

A study in the United Kingdom (UK) showed that for young girls
in North Liverpool, “cycling has signi<U+FB01>cant image problems, with
many saying that they would not consider cycling as a regular
mode of transport” (Cavill and Watkins, 2007). In contrast,

a study in Canada concluded that teenage participants continued
to bicycle into their mid-teens because early motivating factors
(independence, fun, speed, and time ef<U+FB01>ciency) as well as <U+FB01>tness
Table 1
Comparing demographic characteristics (n¼54).

Median agea
Median household incomeb
Percent whitea (%)
Educational achievement: bachelor0 s degree or higherb (%)
a
Census 2010 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2010a).
b
American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year estimates (U.S. Census Bureau, 2010b).
Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24
and health outweighed any negative comments from peers (Orsini,
2007). A life-course study in Australia found that bicycling as a
form of mobility is often abandoned after childhood and that
teenage girls abandon bicycling not because of the lack of “cool-
ness” but because other modes of transportation are more social
(Bonham and Wilson, 2012).
The way teens feel about bicycling may be confounded by
prevailing attitudes towards cars and driving. Getting a driver0 s
license at 16 years old has long been an American rite of passage.
Using data from the National Young Driver Survey of 2007, the
Children0 s Hospital of Philadelphia reports that to teens, driving
is considered an essential coming of age experience, and it has
become an established aspect of teens0 maturation and socializa-
tion process (Children0 s Hospital of Philadelphia, 2007). In that
regard, adolescent attitudes towards bicycling are likely to be
closely and inversely related to attitudes towards driving.
This study examines childhood and teenage experience with
and attitudes towards bicycling as seen in retrospect from adult-
hood. We address several questions in our exploration. How do
attitudes towards and images of bicycling evolve from elementary
school through middle school and on to high school? In high
school, what is the relationship between attitudes towards bicy-
cling and attitudes towards driving and other modes? Finally, to
what degree are attitudes towards bicycling in high school tied to
attitudes towards bicycling in adulthood? The following sections
present our methods and results, as well as a discussion of their
implications for policy.


3. Methods

This study employed a qualitative, retrospective approach to exploring experi-
ences with and attitudes towards bicycling during youth and their in<U+FB02>uence on

attitudes towards bicycling activity in adulthood.


3.1. Sample

Study participants were a convenience sample of residents of Davis, California,

a small city well known for its high level of bicycling by U.S. standards (Buehler and
Handy, 2008; Handy et al., 2012). We recruited participants through advertise-
ments posted in the local newspaper and through <U+FB02>iers that were posted at
downtown businesses and distributed at a local farmer0 s market. The recruitment
notice solicited people interested in “participating in a study concerned with
people0 s attitudes toward transportation”; bicycling was not mentioned in the
notice. All participants were required to be English-speaking residents of Davis
between the ages of 25–65 years old. Participants were offered a $20 gift card in
exchange for participation. Our goal was to recruit 50 participants; after achieving
this goal we recruited four additional male participants to achieve a more equal
gender balance, for a <U+FB01>nal sample size of 54.

The sample of participants was fairly representative of both Davis, California as
well as the U.S. population based on income and race (Table 1). The educational
achievement level of the sample was signi<U+FB01>cantly higher than that of the U.S.
population, and somewhat higher than that of the Davis population. The 25–35
year age bracket was over-represented in the sample, and we interviewed more
women than men (Table 2). Note that while all participants lived in Davis at the
time of the interviews, only 5 grew up in Davis, and the average length of time
living in Davis was 6–10 years. Only one participant had never owned a bicycle or
bicycled.


Participant sample                          Davisa                              U.S.a
38                                          25.2                                37.2
$45,000                                     $59,517                             $51,914
74                                          64.9                                72.4
81                                          68.4                                27.9





S.K. Underwood et al. / Journal of
Table 2
Age and gender distribution of participants (n¼ 54).

25–35 years     36–45 years      46–55 years       56–65 years     Total

Male         9               5                4                 2              20
Female      13               6                7                 8              34
Total       22              11               11                10              54




Table 3

Topics covered in in-depth interviews.


Life stages                                       Aspects of bicycling


   Learning to ride a bike                           Nature and extent of bicycling

   Elementary school                                 Experiences and incidents

   Junior high/middle school                         Family and friends

   High school                                       Community norms

   Post high school/college years                    Physical environment

   Young adult                                       Attitudes and feelings

   Mature adult

3.2. Data collection

For the in-depth interviews, we chose a biographical life-course approach that
produced a bicycling-focused “mobility biography” for each study participant.

Mobility biographies, elicited through guided interviews, can improve understand-
ing of the underlying meanings, motives, and values that help shape attitudes

about travel behavior (Frandberg, 2006). The goal of collecting these biographies
was to gain insight into how participants formulated attitudes towards bicycling
from youth through to adulthood, and to inform understanding of bicycling as an
active mode of transport.

Semi-structured interview guides were developed based on a review of the
literature and input from the multi-disciplinary (urban planning, sociology, cultural
studies, and public health) research team. Questions were designed to guide an in-
depth exploration of each participant0 s experiences with bicycling at different
stages in life. As outlined in Table 3, the interviews covered six stages of life as well
as the time at which the participant learned to ride a bicycle. At each stage,
questions asked about a variety of aspects of bicycling, including the nature and
extent of bicycling, experiences and incidents, community norms, and feelings.
Interviews took place between July and October 2010. Prior to the interview,
participants completed a self-administered questionnaire that gathered demo-

graphic information and data on attitudes, bicycling ability, and other relevant
background information. After at least one practice interview each, two members
of the research team (Underwood, Lee) conducted the interviews (one interviewer
per interview), in roughly equal numbers. Interviews took place in quiet corners of
public locations, such as parks and coffee shops, and were audio-taped. Immedi-

ately following each interview, interviewers made notes re<U+FB02>ecting on the interview,
including any issues that arose as well as impressions of the responses of the

participants that might not have been obvious from their words alone. The audio-
tapes were transcribed by a professional transcriber, and sections noted as
“inaudible” by the transcriber were reviewed and completed or revised by the
two interviewers as needed. The early interviews raised a few issues that were not

anticipated in the literature review, and additional questions and prompts were
then discussed among the researchers and added to the guiding questions for
subsequent interviews, an accepted practice in qualitative research (Glaser and
Strauss, 1967). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
University of California, Davis.


3.3. Interview analysis

In this paper, we focus on experience with and attitudes towards bicycling

during youth (ages 5–18). We de<U+FB01>ned three stages of youth according to school
years: elementary (approximately 5–12 years in the U.S.), middle (12–14 years),
and high school (14–18 years). Across these stages, differing peer groups and social
contexts associated with peer involvement have been found to shape adolescent

identity and attitudes more generally (Weigert et al., 2006). We characterized
bicycling in each stage by whether or not participants owned a bike and by the
nature of their bicycling (i.e. recreation, transportation, or both). We assessed
attitude towards bicycling by asking the degree to which participants “liked riding
a bike” at each stage and used open-ended questions to explore the nature of

attitudes towards bicycling, as well as the contexts within which they developed.
One member of the research team (Underwood) carefully read each transcript
and identi<U+FB01>ed initial themes, which were then reviewed, discussed, and re<U+FB01>ned by
Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24                                                          19
the research team. These broad themes were then used to develop more speci<U+FB01>c
sub-themes, which were incorporated into a coding template. The coding template
was designed to capture the presence or absence of themes and sub-themes in each
interview, as well as the stage in which they occurred (i.e. elementary, middle, or
high school). Two other team members applied the coding template to a sample of
transcripts, and the template was re<U+FB01>ned until an acceptable level of inter-coder
reliability was achieved. The <U+FB01>nal coding template achieved 92% agreement among
three researchers for a sample of interviews. Two team members (Underwood, Lee)
divided the <U+FB01>nal coding for each interview between them (about 70% and 30%,
respectively).
Each transcript was loaded into Atlas.ti, a qualitative analysis software program.
The coding of quotes within Atlas.ti was based on whole statements by respondents

(i.e. everything said between questions by the interviewer), which could range

from a single or partial sentence to a series of sentences. Individual quotes were
coded according to the themes and subthemes in the template, and this coding of

quotes was used as the basis for coding the presence or absence of themes for each
participant. In addition, individual quotes were examined in order to highlight

nuances and generate further understanding of the themes. We combined the

participant-level coding results with the self-administered questionnaire data and

then sorted and cross-tabulated the combined dataset using SPSS to determine

frequencies and identify important patterns. In our analysis, we looked for gender

differences, differences by geographic location or environment type, and genera-

tional differences.

4. Results

In analyzing the interview transcripts, we focused on three
overarching topics: the evolution of experience with and attitudes

towards bicycling from elementary school through middle school


and on to high school; the relationship between attitudes towards
bicycling and attitudes towards driving and other modes in high
school; and the connection between attitudes towards bicycling in
high school and attitudes towards bicycling in adulthood. Many

interesting themes emerged from our analysis.


4.1. Bicycling experience and attitudes


As reported by participants in the survey preceding the inter-
views, bicycling for transportation and recreation declined from
elementary school to high school years (Fig. 1). Recreational biking
was most common during the elementary school period, while

transportation or utility bicycling was most common in middle

school (also known as junior high in some U.S. communities).
Bicycling for both recreation and transportation was least common
in high school. Potential reasons for the decline in bicycling by

high school emerged in the interviews.


To gauge changes in attitude towards bicycling, interviewers
asked participants if they “liked biking” at different stages in life.
In discussing their bicycling experiences during each stage of their
youth, participants expressed many views towards bicycling that

illuminated their conceptualization of bicycling. Participants

expressed views on bicycling with respect to themselves, other
people on bikes, or the general image of biking among their peers.
The most common themes are highlighted below, along with some

of the notable outlying comments. The interviews revealed few
100%

90%                                      Both
80%                                      Recreation
Percent of Participants
70%                                      Transportation
60%
50%

40%

30%
20%
10%

0%
Elementary School   Junior High    High School

Fig. 1. Differences in share of bicycling and bicycling purpose by school level.

20                                           S.K. Underwood et al. / Journal
differences by gender or generation, but the differences by stage of
youth were stark.

4.1.1. Liking biking
In general, “liking biking” decreased from elementary to high
school. Thirty-eight of 54 participants indicated that they “liked
biking” in elementary school. In middle school this number
dropped to 21 participants and by high school only 11 participants
claimed that they had liked biking. Re<U+FB02>ecting this decline, sixteen
participants, almost a third of the sample, responded to the
question of “liking biking” with the response that bicycling had
fallen “off the radar” by high school or even as early as junior high
school, as illustrated by these quotes:

Attitude towards bicycling? It was non-existent. It was not on
the radar other than kids to go to their friend0 s house or
whatever, at least not in my world. (female, 40)
By junior high, I did not think about bicycling. It just was not
ever something I even thought about. (male, 38)

I de<U+FB01>nitely did not care about biking, and did not think about it

much. It was off the radar. (female, 25)

4.1.2. Biking as exciting and fun
Over half of participants said that being on their bike at some
point during their youth was “exciting” or “fun.” Of those com-
ments, most were made about bicycling in elementary school
years. Many participants fondly reminisced about the fun, excite-
ment, and adventure of bicycling in their childhood, for example:

I remember going down these hills really fast and having fun,
sometimes falling off, <U+FB02>ying over the handle bars. You know
when you fall as a kid it0 s kind of exciting. (female, 30)

Similarly, a number of participants described their bikes as fun
“toys,” used a source of entertainment or an instrument of play:

Well, in my age group, and at the time, it was a toy. It was
mostly entertainment for kids. (female, 55)
I used to have a lot of fun with bicycles and my friends. We
used to play games on bicycles with a soccer ball. (male, 35)

4.1.3. Independence and freedom while biking
Over half of participants talked about biking as a source of
“independence” and “freedom” for themselves, and in some cases
for their parents, for whom bicycling meant less need to chauffer
their children around. Of these comments, over half were made in
relation to the elementary school years:
It was de<U+FB01>nitely my <U+FB01>rst experience of really being indepen-
dent. After school we would go to stores and get ice cream and
not have to beg our parents to let us go. We had our bikes to go
there on our own. (female, 37)

It was a way I could get farther away from the house than

walking, and it was freeing for my parents. (male, 32)

When we were in junior high, I remember distinctly when we

were allowed to bike to the 7-Eleven. That was a milestone.

I felt like the world was our oyster at that point. There was not

anywhere we could not go. (male, 34)

A few participants even compared the independence that

comes with bicycling to the independence that comes with being

able to drive a car:

I think when you are a kid…it0 s the closest thing you can get to
having a car. You can take off and just go anywhere on your
bike. Even though you really can not, but you feel like you
could…and that0 s such independence. (female, 56)
of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24
It0 s a core part of who she (my daughter) is. It0 s independence…
it0 s like turning 16 and getting a car. It was that equivalent
[for her]. (female, 42)

4.1.4. Biking as cool
A quarter of participants saw biking as “cool” at some point in
their youth, but over half of these comments were made in
relation to the elementary school years. These comments suggest
a positive image of bicycling, that bicycling was both acceptable
and desirable. For example:

In elementary school I had a banana seat bicycle. It was pretty
cool. (female, 44)
We thought we were pretty cool. We were more of the
little bike gangsters during that time; ride around and knock
over people0 s garbage cans with our bikes and build jumps.
(male, 34)
In contrast, just a few of participants commented on the
“coolness” of biking in middle school and high school, suggesting
a signi<U+FB01>cant change in the image of bicycling by this age. Positive

comments during this stage included:

In 7th grade my bike was really important to me because it was
brand new, and it was the type of bike that I do not think
anyone on the East Coast saw. It was called a Chopper and it
was cool. (male, 53)
I wanted to ride my bike to school, I wanted that independence
again. And there was a bus, but it was not cool to ride the bus. I
was not old enough to get a driver0 s license, but it started
to get cool to ride bikes, because we were all into the whole
environment thing. (female, 56)

A 37-year-old woman from Palo Alto, California, another well-
known bicycle-friendly city, was one of the few participants who
explicitly discussed the “coolness” of bicycling in high school:

I do remember when it was seen as cool. I really wanted to play
up the environmental cred, and there was a small group that
thought it was really cool that I rode my bike and they did too.
(female, 37)

4.1.5. Biking as uncool
Far more participants described bicycling during middle school
or high school as “uncool” or the equivalent. For example, one
participant explained:

Once I was in junior high school it was not the cool thing to do,
to ride bikes. (female, 58)
Three-quarters of the comments about biking as uncool
referred to high school years. These comments suggest a strong
negative image for bicycling at this age:

You would not be caught dead on a bike. It would not be cool to

be riding a bicycle in high school. (male, 50)

What were they going to say about me riding a bike? Nobody

did, so why am I going to do what nobody does? (female, 55)

If you were on your bike…especially in high school, then

something is wrong with you. (male, 26)

Similarly, many participants described biking in youth as being

“nerdy,” “dorky,” “geeky,” “weird,” “lame,” or for “losers,” re<U+FB02>ect-

ing a strong negative image of bicycling. Over two-thirds of these

comments were made in relation to biking in the high school
years, and a disproportionate share of these comments were made
by women. In some cases participants described the negative
image in relation to themselves, and in some cases in relation to
others. Examples included:

S.K. Underwood et al. / Journal
People that biked generally speaking were nerdier…big back-
packs versus the cars with the purse and the book bag.
(female, 25)
It was not lame to do, but it was still one notch below driving
and driving was like the holy grail of getting to school.
(male, 25)
If you were a teenager riding your bicycle you were probably
considered a loser, because everybody drove or had a ride.
It would be hard for someone to ride their bike and not get
teased. (male, 50)

Ten participants described bicycling as “unfashionable” or

“untrendy.” Nearly all of these comments were in relation speci-

<U+FB01>cally to high school, and all were made by women. Examples

from two women, separated by 27 years in age, illustrate this

view:

My younger brother rode a bike a lot in high school, but I did
not. It was not a fashionable thing to do. (female, 52)
In high school biking is not that cool; it did not seem trendy
enough to do. (female, 25)

4.2. Bicycling versus other modes in high school

Not surprisingly, the increasingly negative image of bicycling in

the high school years was clearly explained in part by the onset of

driving. Nearly a third of participants highlighted the connection
between their attitude toward bicycling and the acquisition of a
driver0 s license by themselves or their friends. Examples included:

Biking was not as cool once people started getting their own

cars. It was a little bit of an embarrassment when they were in

their cars, and I was on my bike. I think things starting shifting

where I would rather have someone pick me up from my house

and go with them in the car than on my bike. (male, 53)

In high school I just kind of forgot about biking, I was so excited

to be able to drive. (female, 48)

At the same time, a few participants indicated a clear pre-
ference for walking over bicycling in middle and high school, given
a more positive image of walking among their peers:

When you got into junior high it was almost cooler to even just
walk somewhere than to pull up on your bike. I still liked
biking, but it was not enough to get me through the peer
pressure. (female, 56)
At that point it was not cool to ride your bike. I liked walking
around in groups. You met girls back then, so you0 d walk with
the girls. (male, 38)

Practical issues also made bicycling less feasible as a means of
travel to school. Some participants said they abandoned bicycling
because of the increased distance to middle or high school; it was
simply too far to bicycle:
Our high school was out in the middle of bean <U+FB01>elds and corn
<U+FB01>elds and it would have been quite of a hike for anybody to ride
their bike to school. (male, 50)

Several participants also mentioned that the increased

demands of secondary school caused them to abandon bicycling.

I just remember high school being an insanely busy time. And
so that was not what I did as recreation, and it also did not <U+FB01>t
into my daily life. (female, 27)
Finally, several environmental factors were cited as contribut-
ing to the abandonment of bicycling in middle or high school for
other modes of transport: some mentioned hills and topography,
others cited poor weather, several brought up rural roads as a
of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24                                     21
problem, and others described roads with high amounts of traf<U+FB01>c
as barriers to bicycling in their middle and high school years.

4.3. In<U+FB02>uences on attitudes in adulthood

The interviews revealed a strong connection between attitudes
in high school and attitudes as adults. Of participants who strongly
agreed that they liked bicycling at the time of the interview, nearly
two-thirds said they liked bicycling in high school, while among
those who did not agree that they liked bicycling at the time of the
interview, few said they liked bicycling in high school. Those who

bicycled in high school were far more likely to be bicycling at the

time of the interview than those who did not.

However, the connection between a participant0 s attitude

toward bicycling in high school and her attitude toward bicycling

in adulthood was sometimes subtle. As noted above, most parti-
cipants expressed negative images of bicycling in high school, yet
some managed to ignore or overcome the negative stigma to
continue bicycling and to continue to like bicycling during that
period. Some participants succumbed to the negative stigma in
high school but rebounded later to bicycle again as adults, as did
this woman who now bicycles 7 days a week:
You know, I always liked riding my bicycle as a kid, but when I

got to high school it was considered dorky, so then I never rode

it in high school. (female, 55)

Those who liked bicycling in high school were also more likely
to have liked bicycling in elementary school and middle school,
suggesting that very early in<U+FB02>uences are important to imprinting a

positive attitude toward bicycling, or that some people are

inherently more likely to like bicycling from the start. The inter-

views produced some evidence of the former. When asked what

they like about bicycling now, many participants gave responses

that echoed those for bicycling in childhood. Freedom, for exam-

ple, was cited by nearly half of the participants (though as adults

the bene<U+FB01>t of bicycling is freedom from the cost of driving or the
problem of parking or the limitations of transit schedules, rather
than the freedom to travel independently). A number of partici-
pants talked about bicycling now in other ways that echoed their
memories of bicycling as children:

I feel like I0 m <U+FB02>ying. (female, 29)
It0 s fun to ride fast on streets. (male, 25)
You can join with your friends to bike together to ... explore
new places… I like [bicycling] because [of] this. (female, 26)

The interviews also suggest that college experiences may help
to overcome negative feelings about bicycling in high school.
When asked about fond memories of bicycling, a few participants
talked about the enjoyment of bicycling in college, where the
social image of bicycling was much more positive than in high
school, particularly for college students in Davis.
I think my experience as an undergrad in Davis really shaped
my like for biking. Biking was a really fun thing I did… it was
not just a mode of transportation to campus… I have some
really good memories attached to doing social activities on my

bike. (female, 34)

Fond memories? … my dorm buddies and I would just go on
bike rides… getting lost on our bikes in Davis… we would just
ride out and ride around with no particular destination in
mind. (male, 36)
The interviews thus support the notion that early experiences
with bicycling have an important in<U+FB02>uence on adult attitudes and
behavior, and that positive experiences help to minimize the
effects of negative ones. As one participant put it:

22
Good memories from childhood have a way of staying… with
you until you are much older (male, 35).



5. Discussion

How participants thought about their bicycles changed over the
course of their youth. While in elementary school, many partici-
pants saw their bikes as fun “toys” that provided independence
and were sometimes even considered “cool.” In high school,
bicycles were often supplanted by cars, which became the new
symbol for fun and independence. For nearly a third of partici-
pants, bicycling was “off the radar” and demoted after elementary
school to something “only kids do.” Bikes were abandoned for
other modes of transportation, particularly walking and driving.
Participants cited numerous practical reasons for why they
abandoned bicycling in high school. However, it is signi<U+FB01>cant that
almost two out of <U+FB01>ve participants said that bikes were “uncool” in
high school, and one out of <U+FB01>ve described bicycling in similarly
negative terms such as “nerdy, dorky, geeky, weird, lame, and for
losers” (Fig. 2). It is also noteworthy that the majority of these
comments were made by women in reference to their high school
years. In our study, high school students, especially females, were
particularly sensitive to negative images associated with bicycling,
to the point that bicycling became stigmatized. Adolescence is a
time of identity formation (Weigert et al., 2006), and transporta-
tion mode choice may be tied to self-presentation for some teens.
Cars and driving were prominent in the discussion of bicycling
in high school. For some participants, the relative “coolness”
of cars and driving contributed to the “uncoolness” of bikes
and bicycling. Teenage car aspirations may help to explain why
bicycling has historically been a less acceptable mode of transpor-
tation, especially when cars are associated with high status among
peers. However, this sentiment may be changing. According to
Sivak et al., over the past 25 years the percentage of young people
who have a driver0 s license in the U.S. has declined substantially
(Sivak and Schoettle, 2011). Economic barriers as well as changing
attitudes towards driving and car ownership in youth could
promote long-term reductions in car use and more active travel,
including bicycling (St. George, 2010; Driscoll, 2011).
On the other hand, the results show that biking can be seen as
“cool” by some sub-groups of adolescents. The “coolness” may be
associated with the bike itself (a trendy or popular style of bike), a
value (such as environmentalism or being “green”), or in some
cases deviant behavior that happens while biking. For some teens,
a bike can even be associated with status and self-esteem. The relative
“coolness” of biking seems to be dependent upon the values and
meanings ascribed by teens as a group to bicycling. In some cases,
bicycling might contribute in a positive way to identity formation
and self-presentation (Weigert et al., 2006).


60

50

Number of Participants
40
Independent/
30      Free / Fun /


Exciting

20

10

Fear/ Anxiety
0
Elementary School       Junior High

Fig. 2. Bicycling associations by
S.K. Underwood et al. / Journal of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24
In summary, these results suggest that if bicycling is not
socially normalized or seen as “cool” in a community, teenagers
are less likely to accept it. This is especially true for girls, a <U+FB01>nding
that may help to explain lower rates of bicycling among women in
countries with low rates of utilitarian bicycling (Garrard et al.,
2008). Even when teenagers themselves still enjoy bicycling, they
may be loath to continue bicycling if social norms discourage
them. As a 56-year-old woman said, “I still liked biking, but it was
not enough to get me through the peer pressure.” The supremacy
of social norms over individual attitudes in relation to bicycling
has important implications for policy, as discussed below. In
addition, it has lasting implications for bicycling in adult years.
Given the connection between attitudes in high school and
attitudes as adults, social norms that dampen positive views of
bicycling in high school are likely to dampen bicycling through the
remainder of the life course as well.

5.1. Policy implications

Cultural stigmas can be challenging to overcome, but making
bicycling “cool” may be the <U+FB01>rst step toward increasing support for
bicycling as transportation for teenagers. According to the Safe
Routes to School Partnership (2011), “messages about bicycling as
a way for students to be active and have fun may be a better
starting point than trying to start a program focused on riding to
school.” Similarly, Dill and Voros (2007) argued that “If planners
and advocates hope that increasing cycling among children will
lead to more cycling among adults as they age, efforts need to
focus on cycling for all purposes for children, and not just to
school.” Starting a bicycling club or team might be a good way
for teens to take ownership of the issue and help bicycling
to be embraced as “cool” by other teens. Youth leaders could be
recruited, trained, and supported to create innovative programs
that will be effective with their peers. In addition, as Aldred (2012)
points out, educational and enforcement campaigns need to be
sensitively designed so that they do not reinforce stigma.
In some cases, stigma may be overshadowed and confounded
by the issue of bicycle access. Many low-income youth in the U.S.
do not have access to safe bicycles and cannot afford to get their
bicycles repaired. Community bike shops located in low-income
communities can help overcome this barrier. In addition to classes,
used-bike sales, and self-service repair space, some of these shops
operate an “earn-a-bike/build-a-bike” program geared especially
for young people who learn in-depth bike mechanics and build a
bike of their own by the end of the session. Another approach is to
incorporate bicycle technology into the middle and high school
curriculum, preparing students for careers in the bicycle industry.
Some programs are tailored exclusively for girls, who tend to
bicycle less than boys in adolescence. All of these efforts might
also help to reduce stigma while increasing access to bicycling.
While bicycling programs are potentially important for increas-
ing support for bicycling during the teenage years, driving policies
may be equally as signi<U+FB01>cant, as suggested by the experiences of
European countries like the Netherlands, Denmark, and Germany,
where high bicycling rates continue throughout the teenage

years and into old age (Pucher and Buehler, 2008). The legal age

for a motor vehicle driver0 s license in many European countries is
18 years, and these countries impose high fees and strict training
Uncool/
Unhip/
requirements for obtaining a driver0 s license (Nivola, 1999;

Dorky                   National Research Council, 2001; Buehler, 2010; Pucher and

Buehler, 2010; European Union Commission, 2010). The UK

Department of Transport reports that in 2009 the top three
reasons teens ages 17–20 gave for not driving include the follow-
ing: “cost of learning to drive,” “cost of buying a car,” and “cost of
High School
insurance” (Department for Transport, 2010). These policies mean
school level.                         that the aspirations of European teenagers to drive and own a car

S.K. Underwood et al. / Journal
are delayed relative to their peers in the U.S. In the meantime, they
rely on cheaper means of transportation, including bicycling.
The U.S. has also moved toward restricting driving among
teenagers, although to a lesser degree. As of January 10, 2013 the
website of the National Highway Traf<U+FB01>c Safety Administration
listed 46 US states that have adopted graduated driver licensing
(GDL) laws that restrict the conditions under which young drivers
can drive and require new drivers to obtain a year or more of
experience before receiving a regular license. Research demon-
strates that GDL laws signi<U+FB01>cantly reduce the incidence of teen
driving injuries and fatalities (Baker et al., 2006). The bene<U+FB01>ts of
this reduction are signi<U+FB01>cant, given that mile-for-mile the crash
rate for young drivers is more than twice the rate for 18- to 19-
year-old drivers and almost 10 times the rate for drivers ages 30–
59 (Williams, 2003). Evidence also suggests that these laws reduce
the number of teenagers licensed to drive (Frith and Perkins, 1992;
Ferguson et al., 1996). By discouraging teenagers from acquiring
licenses and restricting their driving when they do, these GDL laws
may inadvertently help to promote bicycling.
In addition to GDL laws, limiting student parking or charging
parking permit fees at high school campuses might encourage
students to use other modes of transportation. Henry M. Gunn High
School in Palo Alto, California implemented a parking permit program
to discourage unnecessary driving and to incentivize carpooling,
public transit use, bicycling, and walking. Motivated by environmental
concerns, students created the program themselves, helping to reduce
social stigmas against bicycling. In Davis, however, proposed parking
fees at the high school have met stiff resistance from parents and
others, despite the strong bicycling culture in the city. Adopting any
restrictions on driving, particularly those that do not have a direct
impact on safety, remains politically challenging in the U.S.

5.2. Study limitations
Several limitations of this study should be noted. The sample
was limited to 54 participants currently living in Davis, where
their experiences with bicycling are not likely to be typical of other

communities in the U.S. However, while 27 participants spent

their youth exclusively in the western U.S., including <U+FB01>ve people
who grew up exclusively in Davis, the rest spent their youth

elsewhere in the U.S. or abroad. In this regard, our study drew on

narratives from a much wider geographic distribution than just
Davis, which may contribute to its generalizability.
The guiding questions prompted participants to re<U+FB02>ect on their

past experiences with bicycles, but reconstructing a mobility biogra-
phy may raise concerns about validity due to missing, selective, or
mistaken memory on the part of participants, or their own wrong

assessment of their experiences (Pooley et al., 2006; Scheiner, 2007).
In this regard, the analysis may have been skewed in favor of
individuals who had better memory recall. However, using a systema-

tic chronological approach to constructing a “bicycling biography” may
have helped to improve memory recall for some participants.
Although the focus of the analysis was on adolescent attitudes

to bicycling, we did not conduct interviews with contemporary

adolescents. The accounts provided by the adults in the sample are
retrospective reconstructions of their past experiences and atti-

tudes, and they may not re<U+FB02>ect the experiences and attitudes of

today0 s youth (Weigert et al., 2006).



6. Conclusions


Even when teenagers themselves still enjoy bicycling, they may
be loath to continue bicycling if social norms discourage them. High

school students, especially females, may be particularly sensitive to
negative images, even stigma, associated with bicycling. Investigating
of Transport & Health 1 (2014) 17–24                                                         23
the experiences with and attitudes of adolescents towards bicycles
and bicycling will improve our understanding of the conditions that
contribute to negative images and stigmatization of bicycling. This
understanding, in turn, provides a basis for the development of
strategies to encourage more positive attitudes towards bicycling, a
vital step towards increasing rates of bicycling among teenagers.
Future research on adolescent experiences with and attitudes
towards bicycling should address variation across community set-
tings, racial and ethnic groups, and income groups. In addition, future
studies should explore the experiences of sub-groups of adolescents
known to have either decidedly positive or negative attitudes to
bicycling.
Increasing the use by teenagers of active modes of travel to school
and other destinations is itself an important public health goal,
particularly given increasing rates of obesity at this age in the U.S.
and elsewhere. But the bene<U+FB01>ts may extend into and throughout
adulthood. Garcia et al. (1998) found that “Childhood and adolescence
are ideal periods of development for fostering active lifestyles that can
be maintained throughout life.” Maintaining bicycling into adulthood
could be especially bene<U+FB01>cial given that overall physical activity tends
to decline from childhood to adulthood (Corder et al., 2009). For these
reasons, it is important to understand early experiences with bicycling
and their connection to bicycling attitudes and activity in adulthood.


Acknowledgments

The research was supported by a grant from the Sustainable
Transportation Center at the University of California Davis, which
receives funding from the U.S. Department of Transportation and
Caltrans, the California Department of Transportation, through the
University Transportation Centers program.

References

Ajzen, I., 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Org. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 50
(2), 179–211.

Albarracin, D., Johnson, B.T., et al., 2005. The Handbook of Attitudes. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Publishers, Mahwah, N.J.
Aldred, R., 2012. Incompetent or too competent? Negotiating everyday cycling
identities in a motor dominated society. Mobilities 8 (2), 252–271.

Baker, S.P., Chen, L.-H., et al., 2006. National Evaluation of Graduated Driver
Licensing Programs. National Highway Traf<U+FB01>c Safety Administration, Washing-
ton, DC.
Beirão, G., Sars<U+FB01>eld Cabral, J.A., 2007. Understanding attitudes towards public
transport and private car: a qualitative study. Transp. Pol. 14 (6), 478–489.
Bonham, J., Wilson, A., 2012. Bicycling and the life course: the start-stop-start
experiences of women cycling. Int. J. Sustain. Transp. 6, 4.
Buehler, R., 2010. Transport policies, automobile use, and sustainable transport: a
comparison of Germany and the United States. J. Plann. Educ. Res. 30 (1), 76–93.
Buehler, T., Handy, S.L., 2008. Fifty years of bicycle policy in Davis, California.
Transp. Res. Rec. 2074, 52–57.
Cavill, N., Watkins, F., 2007. Cycling and health: an exploratory study of views about
cycling in an area of North Liverpool, UK. Health Educ. 107 (5), 404–420.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2010. Vital signs: state-speci<U+FB01>c obesity
prevalence among adults – United States, 2009. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report 59 (30), 951–955.
Children0 s Hospital of Philadelphia, 2007. Driving: through the eyes of teens. A

Research Report of The Children0 s Hospital of Philadelphia and State Farms.
Corder, K., Ogilvie, D., et al., 2009. Invited commentary: physical activity over the
life course-whose behavior changes, when, and why? Am. J. Epidemiol. 170 (9),
1078–1081.

Cooper, A.R., Jago, R., Page, A.S., et al., 2008. Longitudinal associations of cycling to
school with adolescent <U+FB01>tness. Prev. Med. 47 (3), 324–328.
Davies, D.G., Halliday, M.E., et al., 1997. Attitudes to Cycling: a qualitative Study and
Conceptual Framework. Transport Research Laboratory.
de Geus, B., Joncheere, J., Meeusen, R., 2009. Commuter cycling: effect on physical

performance in untrained men and women in Flanders: minimum dose to
improve indexes of <U+FB01>tness. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 19 (2), 179–187.
Department for Transport, N. T. S., 2010. Reasons for not driving by age: Great
Britain, 2010. Retrieved September 23, 2011 from: <https://www.gov.uk/govern
ment/uploads/system/…/nts0203.xls>.
Devos, T., 2008. Implicit Attitudes 101: Theoretical and Empirical Insights. Attitudes
and attitude change. Psychology Press, New York; London.
