















Problem, research strategy, and
findings: Three children 14 and younger
are killed daily in the United States and

almost 500 more are injured in traffic
crashes, often while traveling to or from

school. Previous studies examine the effect
of built environmental characteristics on
school travel safety, but are limited. I
simultaneously evaluate the impact of street
segment–level and neighborhood-level

design characteristics on crashes involving
elementary school–aged child pedestrians
during school travel time around 78
elementary schools in Austin (TX). I find
that more school travel–related collisions
happen on highways and interstates and
arterial roads and where there are traffic-

generating land uses and transit stops.
Fewer crashes occur on local roads and
when there are connected sidewalks.
Unfortunately, I do not consider microlevel
features of the built environment; more-
over, the crash data may include children’s
crashes not related to school travel.
Takeaway for practice: Planners

should collaborate with a wide variety of
agencies and organizations at different
levels of government as well as with
parents and neighborhood residents to
create pedestrian-friendly schools that

reduce or overcome current barriers to
safe, human-powered school travel.

Planners should address both current
school safety problems at existing schools
and help ensure better school siting and
complementary planning and transporta-
tion decisions in the future.
Keywords: school travel safety, built
environment, school siting, traffic safety,

neighborhood planning.

About the author: Chia-Yuan Yu

(Chia-Yuan.Yu@ucf.edu) is an assistant




RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 203
203




How Differences in
Roadways Affect School
Travel Safety
Chia-Yuan Yu




C
hildren are a particularly vulnerable group for traffic-related injuries
and fatalities (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

[NHTSA], 2012). Motor vehicle collisions are the leading cause of


death for children under 15 in the United States (NHTSA, 2012). In 2013, an
average of three children aged 14 and younger were killed, and an additional
470 were injured, each day in traffic crashes in the United States (NHTSA,
2015). A significant number of collisions involving school-aged children occur
on their journey to and from school (Warsh, Rothman, Slater, Steverango, &

Howard, 2009). Schools experience substantial traffic during the morning and

afternoon peaks as motorists drop off or pick up their children while other
children arrive or depart by walking, using public transit or school buses,
cycling, or skateboarding. In 2009, 6.6 billion vehicle trips, covering 30 billion
vehicle miles, were made to take or pick up children to and from school in the
United States (McDonald, Brown, Marchetti, & Pedroso, 2011). A study in

Toronto (Canada) finds that the crash rates of children aged 5 to 9 years are

three times higher when they travel to or from school than at other times
(Warsh et al., 2009). Not surprisingly, parents often report that traffic con-
cerns are a major determinant in the choice of their children’s travel mode to
and from school (D’Haese, De Meester, De Bourdeaudhuij, Deforche, &
Cardon, 2011; McDonald & Aalborg, 2009). For these very reasons, Congress


established the Safe Routes to School (SRTS) program in 2005 to fund a
variety of approaches to increase school safety, from educating and training
school children to avoid risks to traffic engineering improvements near
schools. However, we have little information on the impacts of the built
environment, particularly the kinds and types of roadways surrounding

schools, on school travel safety.


Researchers have not paid sufficient attention to the impacts of commu-
nity design and the built environment on the travel safety of young children,
or differences by the age of the children and the type of school they are attend-
ing. Previous studies on crashes involving school-aged children investigate



professor in the Urban and Regional Planning       Journal of the American Planning Association,
program at the University of Central Florida.      Vol. 81, No. 3, Summer 2015

DOI 10.1080/01944363.2015.1080599
Color versions of one or more of the figures can
© American Planning Association, Chicago, IL.
be found online at www.tandfonline.com/rjpa.




23/09/15 11:33 AM

204 Journal of the American Planning Association, Summer 2015,



children in a wide age range, including those attending
elementary, middle, and high schools (Desapriya et al.,
2011; Warsh et al., 2009). Yet, there are wide variations in
the abilities of children of different ages and the size and
siting of schools encompassing different grades.
To address these concerns, I examine a wide range of
attributes of the built environment around elementary
schools, including both road and neighborhood environ-
ments, for their potential links to crashes involving elemen-
tary school–aged (5 to 12 years) child pedestrians on their
travel to school. I focus on crashes involving elementary
school children because elementary school children are
relatively more vulnerable than middle and high school
children (Abdel-Aty, Chundi, & Lee, 2007). In addition,
I go beyond current studies on school travel safety that
consider only the influence of street segment–level or
neighborhood-level variables (Abdel-Aty et al., 2007;
Clifton & Kreamer-Fults, 2007) by considering both
factors.
I analyze the risk of a car striking a child aged 5 to
12 years around 78 elementary schools in the Austin (TX)
Independent School District (AISD) by using two-level
(street segment–level and neighborhood-level) binomial
logistic models. I find more elementary school travel–
related crashes occur on highways/interstates and arterial
roads, while fewer crashes happen on local roads.
Connected sidewalks along street segments decrease the
probability of crashes involving elementary school children
traveling to school, while commercial uses and transit stops
along street segments increase the probability of crashes.
Roads with higher speed limits also increase the probability
of crashes involving children traveling to elementary
schools.
Planners can use these results to improve and enhance
the safety of children walking or cycling to school, whether
part of formal SRTS plans, or increasingly as part of
ongoing city planning processes (McDonald et al., 2014).
My research reinforces previous recommendations that
planners should work with a wide variety of stakeholders
and public agencies at all levels of government to ensure
pedestrian-friendly access to schools (Cooner, Fitzpatrick,
Wooldridge, & Ford, 2003). Planners should address both
current school safety problems at existing schools and help
ensure better school siting and complementary planning
and transportation decisions in the future.
In this study, I review the literature on the causes of
crashes involving pedestrians, both children and those of
all ages. I then describe my research and methods and
summarize the relationship between traffic speeds, pedes-
trian infrastructure, and land uses on one hand, and pedes-
trian crashes involving elementary school children traveling



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 204
Vol. 81, No. 3



to or from school on the other. I conclude with three
recommendations for planners to help create pedestrian-
friendly and safe access to school: Work with traffic
engineers to prioritize improvements and reduce speeds
around existing schools; collaborate with a wide range of
stakeholders to identify hot spots or sites of auto–
pedestrian conflicts; and work with school districts to
better incorporate sound planning principles into school
siting decisions in the future.


Community Design and School Travel
Safety

Schools serve as the center of daily activities for school-
aged (5 to 12 years) children. Researchers have identified
schools as high-risk crash locations (Clifton, Burnier, &
Akar, 2009; Clifton & Kreamer-Fults, 2007; LaScala,
Gruenewald, & Johnson, 2004) because they experience
regular, concentrated, and congested traffic flows that
create safety threats to children traveling to and from
school (Abdel-Aty et al., 2007; Clifton & Kreamer-Fults,
2007; LaScala et al., 2004). School siting might be a key
factor in influencing children’s school travel behaviors and
traffic safety around school areas, and was the source of
much discussion among early urbanists.
Early urban designers focused on community-centered
schools, which were inspired by the 1929 Perry concept of
the neighborhood unit, a significant planning paradigm
that influenced many local planning and subdivision
design practices prior to World War II (Lawhon, 2009;
McDonald, 2010). These schools are designed to be
surrounded by well-connected infrastructure for nonmo-
torized modes and by local roads with low speed limits and
traffic volumes (National Governors Association Center for
Best Practices, 2007). In this model, commercial uses are
located on arterial roads served by automobiles, while
residential uses are placed on disconnected local roads and
cul-de-sacs to separate pedestrians from that vehicle travel
(National Governors Association Center for Best Practices,
2007). Such patterns were advanced supporting a safe
pedestrian environment for school children and all pedes-
trians. Perry’s (1929) model has largely been discredited
(Talen, Menozzi, & Schaefer, 2015), and its importance in
school siting decisions faded with the advent of school
buses (making it unnecessary to site schools within walking
distance of residences).
The more common type of school is often seen in
suburban areas. In 1953, the Council of Educational
Facility Planners (CEFPI) suggested that elementary school
sites should be a minimum of 10 acres, plus one additional



23/09/15 11:33 AM

Yu: How Differences in Roadways Affect School Travel Safety                                                                                          205



acre per 100 students. This standard was adopted in most                      that low-income neighborhoods have higher macrolevel
states and resulted in large elementary schools on less                       walkability but poorer microlevel environments than
expensive lands, comparatively far away from the residen-                     higher-income neighborhoods because the streets are
tial areas they serve (National Governors Association                         poorly maintained and lack amenities such as street trees.
Center for Best Practices, 2007). These suburban schools                          Table 1 shows different street segment–level (micro)
are designed primarily for motorist convenience; they are                     and neighborhood-level (macro) built environments around
often located near highways and arterial roads, a character-                  two elementary school paradigms: community-centered
istic that increases traffic exposure while failing to promote                schools and suburban schools. Community-centered
safe spaces with reduced traffic conflicts and pedestrian                     schools are surrounded by local roads with low speed limits
injuries (National Governors Association Center for Best                      and nonmotorized infrastructure (street segment level) and
Practices, 2007).                                                             connected street networks, residential uses, and low traffic
Where elementary schools are located, as well as the                    volume (neighborhood level). Suburban schools are located
design of the surrounding environment, create different                       near highways or arterial roads with high speed limits (street
travel patterns with different safety impacts. Elementary                     segment level) and cul-de-sac designs, commercial uses, and
schools surrounded by safe built environments for walking                     high traffic volume (neighborhood level).
(e.g., low-speed roads, connected sidewalks, etc.) may
make parents feel it is safe to allow their children to use
human-powered modes to travel to school (McMillan,                            The Safe Routes to School Program
2005; Nelson & Woods, 2010). Conversely, schools near
and School Travel Safety
major arterials in neighborhoods with cul-de-sac designs
may encourage parents to drive children to school to keep                          In 2005, Congress created the Safe Routes to School
them safe (McMillan, 2007; Timperio et al., 2006;                             (SRTS) program, which funds both infrastructure projects,
Trapp et al., 2012).                                                          such as adding sidewalks and traffic signals near schools, and
Built environments at different scales—macro versus                     non-infrastructure projects, such as education, training, and
micro—may provide different incentives or barriers to                         incentive programs (Stewart, 2011). Most researchers find
walking to school. I define the macro elements to include                     that SRTS programs are effective in increasing the use of
community environments such as street connectivity and                        human-powered modes for the school commute. McDonald
mixed land use; I define microenvironments to include                         et al. (2014) report on a large-scale study at 801 schools in
detailed neighborhood elements such as nonmotorized                           the District of Columbia, Florida, Oregon, and Texas,
infrastructure and traffic speed. These types of elements                     finding that walking and biking to school increase after local
may have differential or even contradictory impacts on                        implementation of SRTS programs: an 18% increase due to
traffic safety. For example, an Austin (TX) study finds that                  engineering improvements and a 25% increase due to
macroenvironments with higher density, street connectiv-                      education and enforcement programs.
ity, and mixed land uses in low-income and Hispanic                                However, fewer studies have looked directly at the
neighborhoods are more walkable than high-income and                          traffic safety impacts of these mode changes on students. A
mostly non-Hispanic White communities. However, at the                        California study examining the safety impacts of SRTS
same time, those neighborhoods face poor microenviron-                        projects finds that there is a significant decline in the total
ments because they have worse sidewalk maintenance and                        number of pedestrian- or bicycle-involved collisions within
esthetics and higher crash and crime rates (Zhu & Lee,                        250 feet of 47 schools with SRTS projects (Ragland,
2008). Another study in New York City also illustrates the                    Pande, Bigham, & Cooper, 2014). A New York City study
conflict between the macro- and microenvironments in                          also shows that the rates of school-aged pedestrian injuries
low-income neighborhoods; Neckerman et al. (2009) find                        during school travel hours decreased by 44% in census

Table 1. Different types of school surrounding by different community designs (street segment level and neighborhood level).

Built environments at different scales                             Community-centered school                                  Suburban school
Neighborhood-level environment                                     Connected street network                                   Cul-de-sac design
Residential use                                            Commercial use
Low traffic volume                                         High traffic volume
Street segment–level environment                                   Local road                                                 Highway/arterial road
Low speed limit                                            High speed limit
Nonmotorized infrastructure                                Motorized convenience




RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 205                                                                                                                             23/09/15





























































11:33 AM

206 Journal of the American Planning Association, Summer 2015,



tracts with SRTS programs and remain unchanged for
those census tracts without SRTS projects (DiMaggio &
Li, 2013). Boarnet, Anderson, Day, McMillan, and
Alfonzo (2005) find that traffic conflicts and crash risk
decrease after the implementation of a sidewalk gap closure
project because more students are using sidewalks rather
than walking or biking in the street or on the shoulder of
the road. In contrast, Orenstein, Gutierrez, Rice, Jill, and
Ragland (2007) report that the rates of child-related colli-
sions are not dramatically different for schools with and
without SRTS construction projects, although crash rates
do not increase as the number of students walking to
school increases.
However, SRTS projects focus primarily on incentive,
education, enforcement, and training programs or
relatively marginal physical changes to the school environ-
ment. Most do not focus on aspects of the built environ-
ment or explicitly consider the safety effects of the design
of the surrounding community. In fact, SRTS projects
cannot directly address neighborhood designs or the extent
to which schools are located near high-volume roads.


Evidence of the Impacts of Community
Design on School Travel Safety and
Pedestrian Safety

Several descriptive studies of school-aged child pedes-
trian collisions are informative. For example, Warsh et al.
(2009) explore the characteristics of child (younger than
18) pedestrian collisions in school zones in Toronto
(Canada); they find that more crashes occur at midblock
than at intersections (as is true of all pedestrian crashes).
Desapriya et al. (2011) report that almost 86% of child
(younger than 19) pedestrian fatalities in British Columbia
(Canada) occur in roads with a speed limit of 30 miles per
hour or higher.
Few studies have linked factors in the built environ-
ment, such as land uses and road types, to crashes involv-
ing school-aged children, although many studies show
that total crashes are significantly affected by all these
factors (Shawsky, Garib, & Al-Harthei, 2014). However,
Clifton and Kreamer-Fults (2007) explore the impacts of
neighborhood-level environments on pedestrian–vehicle
crashes involving school-aged children (5 to 18 years)
around 163 public schools in Baltimore (MD). They
report that areas with a higher non-White population and
a higher population density experience more school-aged
children (5 to 18 years) pedestrian–vehicle crashes. Areas
with great commercial access and mixed land uses also
have higher school-aged children (5 to 18 years)



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 206
Vol. 81, No. 3



pedestrian–vehicle crashes. Abdel-Aty et al. (2007) exam-
ine the effects of road environments at the street segment
level on crashes involving children aged 4 to 18 around
schools in Orange County (FL). They find that these
students are more likely to be involved in crashes on
high-speed, multilane roads.
These studies use statistical analyses to examine the
relationship between built environments and crashes
involving school-aged children, but have limitations. First,
these studies do not account for traffic volumes and school
enrollment, important exposure factors affecting crashes
involving school-aged children. Second, these studies tend
to group crashes involving a wide range of school-aged
children from 4 to 18 years attending elementary school,
middle school, and high school. However, Abdel-Aty et al.
(2007) report that elementary school children are more
likely to be involved in school-related crashes than middle
and high school children. Moreover, the designs of, and
policies on, school siting also differ significantly for
elementary, middle, and high schools (National Governors
Association Center for Best Practices, 2007).
It is important to note that pedestrian crashes at
specific sites are actually rare; thus, many studies are forced
to rely on changes in factors or surrogate safety measures
thought to influence crashes (Federal Highway Administra-
tion [FHWA], 2011). Surrogate measures include whether
drivers slow down when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crossing or whether pedestrians refrain from
crossing midblock, or when the traffic light is against them
or there is insufficient time remaining to cross. Changes in
these surrogate measures, or risk factors, may not actually
be directly linked to changes in crash rates (FHWA, 2011).
There is a literature on the impact of the general built
environment on child pedestrian and total pedestrian
crashes that also informs my work (Aziz, Ukkusuri, &
Hasan, 2013; Kim, Lee, Washington, & Choi, 2007;
Mannering & Bhat, 2014; Mohamed, Saunier, Miranda-
Moreno, & Ukkusuri, 2013; Ukkusuri, Hasan, & Aziz,
2011). In general, this research finds that traffic-generating
uses such as commercial enterprises are linked to higher
pedestrian crash rates because they attract both motorists
and pedestrians, thus increasing the possibility for conflicts
(Jemprapai & Srinivasan, 2014). Bennet and Yiannakoulis
(2015) find that child pedestrian injuries at intersections
are associated with land use characteristics, traffic volume,
and intersection controls; however, they find that similar
crashes at midblock locations are not associated with
small-scale environmental features, suggesting that chil-
dren’s crash risks differ across locations. Di, Taquechel,
Steward, and Strasser (2010) find that pedestrian crashes in
Georgia are more frequent on road segments where streets



23/09/15 11:33 AM

Yu: How Differences in Roadways Affect School Travel Safety



are compact, where there are mixed land uses, and where
density is high. Elias and Shiftan (2014) find that child
pedestrian road crashes are affected by socioeconomic
status, travel patterns, and land use.
There are also other consistent patterns in overall
pedestrian crash data: Most crashes occur outside of inter-
sections, and those crashes are more serious than those
occurring in intersections. The FHWA (2013) reports that
68.1% of all pedestrian crashes are not in intersections;
NHTSA (2015) finds, however, that more than 80% of
child pedestrian traffic fatalities occur outside intersections.
Moreover, most child pedestrian fatalities occur between
3 p.m. and 5:59 p.m., when most children would return
home from school. Koopman, Friedman, Kwon, and
Sheehan (2015) report that in Chicago, children are
more likely to be involved in a pedestrian crash (per
100,000 people) than adults but are less likely to be in-
volved in fatal pedestrian crashes. These researchers also
find that younger pedestrians are more likely to be involved
in midblock crashes; that is, there is an inverse relationship
between age and the likelihood of being involved in a
midblock crash.
Driveways are recognized hot spots for traffic crashes
involving pedestrians of all ages (Gattis et al., 2013), even
in residential areas (Box, 1969), although crashes occurring
in private driveways and outside of public rights-of-way are
usually not recorded in traffic safety data (NHTSA, 2014a,
2014b). Gattis et al. (2013) note that “Driveway connec-
tions create intersections, which in turn create conflicts
with bicyclists, pedestrians, and other motor vehicles”
(p. 38) and suggest that driveways should be conspicuous
and clearly delineated for various road users. At the same
time, they note that while driveway crashes constitute
between 11% and 19% of all crashes, those involving
pedestrians or cyclists account for a very small percentage
(less than 3%) of all crashes (although they may be
underreported, as is true of all pedestrian crashes).
In addition, the lack of marked crosswalks is also
linked to higher pedestrian crash rates because neither
pedestrians nor motorists realize the dangers involved;
Haleem, Alluri, and Gan (2015) recommend placing
standard crosswalks at unsignalized intersections. An
FHWA (2010) study finds that raised pedestrian safety
islands reduce pedestrian crashes at marked crosswalks by
47% and at unmarked crosswalks by 39%. Samuel et al.
(2013) report that drivers approaching a pedestrian
crosswalk are more likely to scan the environment in
search of pedestrians when there are advanced yield
markings, signs, or signals 20 to 50 feet before a marked
crosswalk, coupled with removing parking spaces imme-
diately adjacent to the crosswalk (thus increasing a



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 207
207



driver’s ability to see pedestrians starting to cross the
street). Vasudevan, Pulugurtha, Nambisan, and Dangeti
(2011) find that pedestrian-activated traffic signals (in-
cluding flashing yellow lights and countdown signals)
improve the behavior of both drivers and pedestrians. A
Texas Transportation Institute (TTI; 2014) study at a
number of sites in the state concludes that traffic control
signals are the most effective at getting drivers to yield to
pedestrians, but other flashing signals and beacons are
almost as effective. Most important, TTI finds that the
more widespread the use of a specific traffic control
measure in the city they study, the greater the number of
drivers that yield to pedestrians, possibly because they
have a better understanding of how the device works
because they have greater exposure to it.
However, there is some dispute about the actual and
relative impact of crosswalks and a variety of traffic
signals on all pedestrian crashes. Some studies conclude,
for example, that marked crosswalks actually involve
higher pedestrian crash rates (Zhao, Tian, & Herandez,
2013). A study in New York City finds that signal-related
countermeasures are more effective in reducing pedes-
trian crashes than high-visibility crosswalks (Chen,
Chen, & Ewing, 2012). An FHWA (2011) study reports
that while advanced stop or yield lines with additional
signing near marked crosswalks are a commonly recom-
mended safety countermeasure, they are not widely used
and may have limited effectiveness on high-speed, high-
volume roads.
It is also important to recognize the impact of pedes-
trian behavior and compliance with traffic signals on
crashes. Hussein, Sayed, Reyad, and Kim (2015) find that
the main factor explaining a high number of conflicts
between vehicles and pedestrians of all ages is pedestrians
crossing the street when pedestrian signals are flashing or
say “Don’t Walk.” They find that during a two-hour period
at a major signalized intersection in New York City more
than a third of pedestrians are either crossing outside the
crosswalk or past the time they should have started to
cross. This supports the focus of traffic safety experts on
education as well as enforcement and traffic treatments in
reducing pedestrian crashes.
Many traffic safety experts suggest the need for inte-
grated and cooperative approaches to school safety and
pedestrian safety overall, although they rarely see a role for
planners. Haleem et al. (2015) comment that to improve
pedestrian safety, “appropriate countermeasures should be
organized through the coordination of law enforcement
officers, safety engineers, and the public to integrate the
components of the four E’s: engineering, education,
enforcement, and emergency response” (p. 22).



23/09/15 11:33 AM

208 Journal of the American Planning Association, Summer 2015, Vol.



Evaluating Macro- and Microlevel

Design Characteristics

To build on the existing literature and address gaps in
prior work, I use actual crash data, not surrogate measures,
on crashes involving elementary school–aged (5 to 12 years)
children. I evaluate the impact of macro- and microlevel
design characteristics on school travel safety. Moreover, in
contrast to prior studies that examine the impact of built

environments on school travel safety only at one scale—street

segment level or neighborhood level—I simultaneously

examine the impact of both street segment–level and neigh-
borhood-level built environments on school-related crashes.
My approach allows me to offer suggestions on how planners
can improve school travel safety by better designing the road
network and the environment around elementary schools.
I examine the relationship between the built environments
around schools and crashes involving elementary school–aged
child pedestrians specifically during school travel time, which
has not been examined in the urban planning literature.
I selected 78 elementary schools in the AISD, serving
central Austin (TX), a 271.8-square-mile area with 60,263
children aged 5 to 12 in these 78 schools. The selected
schools and their catchment areas feature diverse develop-
ment patterns, ranging from inner-city neighborhoods
with high densities, small parcels, and grid-like street
networks on one hand, to suburban neighborhoods with
low densities, larger parcels, and cul-de-sac street networks
on the other hand. This sample provides enough variation
to explore the association between built environments and
school travel safety. Moreover, I use 0.5-mile buffers
around each school, assuming that this is a feasible distance
for elementary school–aged children to walk.


Measuring Street Segment–Level
School Travel Safety

I use five-year (2008–2012) crash data from the Texas

Department of Transportation (TxDOT). These data provide

the age of people involved in the crash and time of the crash

(e.g., the day of the week and the time of the day). I geo-

coded these collisions based on the longitude and latitude of

the crash. To identify crashes involving elementary school–

aged child pedestrians during school travel time, I use six

criteria developed by Abdel-Aty et al. (2007) and McDonald

et al. (2011). I identify and select crashes that involve:

• pedestrians and vehicles;
• people who were 5 to 11 years old for schools serving
grades 1 through 5, or 5 to 12 years old for schools
serving grades 1 through 6;



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 208
81, No. 3



Table 2. Number of crashes involving elementary school–aged child
pedestrians during school travel time within 0.5-mile parcel buffers from
elementary schools in the Austin (TX) Independent School District.

Year                      Number                         Percentage
2008                         185                            19.68%
2009                         172                            18.30%
2010                         198                            21.06%
2011                         183                            19.47%

2012                         202                            21.49%

Total                        940                           100.00%

Source: TxDOT (2008–2012).



• weekdays (from Monday to Friday);
• school travel time (5 to 11 a.m. and 1 to 6 p.m.); and
• 0.5-mile buffers around each of the 78 AISD elemen-
tary schools.
I do not consider one of the six criteria used by Abdel-Aty
et al. (2007) and McDonald et al. (2011)—the date of the
crashes—because the data are not available. Thus, I do not
know if the crash occurred while school was in session.
As Table 2 shows, using these criteria I identify a total
of 940 crashes involving elementary school–aged child
pedestrians during school travel time between 2008 and
2012 within the 0.5-mile parcel buffers of 78 elementary
schools in the AISD.
I use the street segment as the unit of analysis to avoid
the serious spatial autocorrelation issues that would arise if
each single crash point is used as the unit of analysis and a
buffer around the school is used for measuring built
environments. I split street segments at intersections and at
jurisdiction boundaries to ensure there are no major
changes in road characteristics along each segment. I cut
off street segments at the point where they intersect with
the 0.5-mile buffer boundary around each school because
the study area is limited to those buffers.
In total, 11,178 unique street segments are located

within 0.5-mile school buffers around 78 elementary

schools in the AISD. Of those, 2,072 segments are located

within the buffers of two schools, and 247 segments are

located within the buffers of three schools. I counted these

segments two or three times for the analysis; that is, I reuse

the same segment for all the schools with which it is

associated, because crashes that occur on these segments are

influenced by environments around the corresponding

schools. As a result, the final sample size is 16,063 seg-
ments. To test whether this creates problems, I also calcu-
lated the average neighborhood-level characteristics of two
or three schools for these street segments and ran the
model to test the consistency of the results. The results for



23/09/15 11:33 AM

Yu: How Differences in Roadways Affect School Travel Safety



the model that use duplicate street segments (N = 16,063)
and for the model using average neighborhood-level char-
acteristics (N = 11,178) are consistent: Reusing the same
segments two or three times do not bias the result.
Roughly 85% of the street segments had no crashes
between 2008 and 2012. Because the data show there was
no more than one crash per street segment, I measure the
school travel safety performance of each street segment
using a binary outcome variable in which “with crashes”
equals 1 and “without crashes” equals 0.
I use three sets of factors as independent variables
based on the research literature: risk exposure, sociodemo-
graphic factors, and characteristics of the built environ-
ment. Table 3 lists the dependent and independent
variables, their measurements, data sources, and units of
measurement. For risk exposure, I consider the average
daily traffic count for each street segment in the 0.5-mile
elementary school buffers (collected by the City of Austin)
and school enrollment for each school. I do not have
pedestrian volumes around schools and thus did not
include them.
Sociodemographic characteristics include total popula-
tion density, percentage of the population younger than
12 years, percentage of non-White population, percentage
of the population with less than a high school education,
percentage of male population, and percentage of the
population below the poverty line within the 0.5-mile
elementary school buffers. I use sociodemographic infor-
mation for 2010 U.S. Census block groups, and I split the
population in the census block group into the school
buffers by the fraction of the area of the school buffer in
each census block group.
As Figure 1 shows, I consider two types/levels of built
environments: road environments around the street
segment (level 1) and neighborhood environments around
schools (level 2). The parcel-level land use, street




Figure 1. Hierarchical sturucture of road environments and neighborhood




RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 209
209



centerline, and sidewalk data are from the City of Austin
geographic information system (GIS) data sets.
I create 100-foot buffers around each street segment to
stand for road environments. I determine buffer size based
on several considerations. First, I refer to the minimum
requirements on lane width, shoulder width, and median
width for different road types (i.e., freeways, arterial roads,
city collectors, and local roads) from the FHWA (TxDOT,
2014). For example, the minimum lane width of highways
is 12 feet, and each highway has at least two lanes in each
direction. The widths of both the outside and the inside
shoulder for highways are 4 to 12 feet on average. If a
highway is designed with two lanes, one outside shoulder,
and one inside shoulder for both directions, the minimum
total width would be 96 feet. Given these minimum re-
quirements, I choose a slightly larger buffer size of 100 feet,
which is wide enough to capture most of the land uses
around the corresponding street segments while avoiding
those along other street segments. Last, this buffer size is
reasonably small or narrow to avoid excessive overlaps
among the buffers that would cause serious spatial autocor-
relations.
For road environments, I include the segment length,
distance to school parcel, posted speed limit, road class
(highways or interstates, arterials, local roads, city collec-
tors, and ramps and turnarounds), nonmotorized infra-
structure (sidewalk and bike lane completeness), transit
service density, and the number of parcels for land use
types (residential, commercial, office, industrial, and park)
along the street segment.
For the neighborhood environment around schools,
I include not only the just-described variables to measure
road environments, but also additional variables such as
the three-leg (T junction or Y junction) and four-or-more-
leg (crossroad) street intersection densities, the percentage
of busy roads (highways or freeways and arterial roads),




environments around schools.




23/09/15 11:33 AM

Yu: How Differences in Roadways Affect School Travel Safety



and the percentages of five major land use types: residen-
tial, commercial, office, industrial, and park. I use the
0.5-mile buffer around each school as the unit of analysis
to be consistent with the crash selection criteria.
I use a binomial logistic model for the analysis because
the dependent variable is a binary measurement. I model
the probability of a crash involving elementary school–aged
pedestrians during school travel time as a function of three
types of factors: risk exposures, sociodemographic charac-
teristics, and characteristics of the built environment. I use
a two-level model, as described in the Technical Appendix,
to fit the data structure because I consider two types or
levels of built environments: street segment level and
neighborhood level. As a result, the reported odds ratios
represent what impact a 1% change in the independent
variable has on the probability of a crash involving elemen-
tary school–aged child pedestrians during school travel
time on each street segment.
This study has some limitations. First, I do not con-
sider microlevel features of the built environment such as
trees and street amenities, the maintenance and quality of
the road, or pedestrian and cycling infrastructure due to
data limitations, nor do I have information on the type of
traffic controls or the location of crosswalks. Second, some
of the crash data may be incomplete or misleading; pedes-
trian crashes are underreported, and the crash data I do
have may include children’s crashes not related to travel to
school. Third, the timeframes of the GIS data sets vary
slightly, but urban patterns might differ at different times.
Fourth, the results of this study may be subject to the scale
effect (what is known as the modifiable areal unit problem
[MAUP]) since I consider only a small buffer, a half-mile,
around school sites. Future studies should examine the
built environment–school travel safety relationship using
different buffer sizes to test the consistency of the results
(Mitra & Buliung, 2012).
Fifth, I do not know if crashes occurred while school
was in session. Finally, this study only explores one aspect
of school travel safety: the number and local of street
segment–level school travel–related collisions. Future
research should address other perspectives, such as crash
severity and outcomes.


How Does the Built Environment
Affect School Travel Safety?


Street Characteristics and Crash Risk
My research shows that the type and function of streets
and roads near schools makes a difference in school travel



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 213
213



safety. I find that street segments with higher traffic vol-
umes have a higher probability of crashes involving school-
aged child pedestrians during school travel time. Street
segments with a higher speed limit are associated with a
higher probability of crash risk for children traveling to
school. Highways or freeways and arterial roads increase
the crash risk for children traveling to school, while local
roads have a lower crash risk. I also find that street seg-
ments with a higher density of transit stops increase the
crash risk.
I show that more school travel–related crashes occur
on highways/interstates and arterial roads and fewer crashes
happen on local roads. The result show that the impact is
significant: A 1% increase in arterial roads around schools
led to a 186% increase in the likelihood of school travel–
related crashes. Previous studies suggest that drivers have
less time to react to unexpected hazards when traveling
on arterial roads with high operating speeds. Highways and
arterial roads are designed for high operating travel speeds
with wide and straight lanes, while narrow local roads
decrease vehicle speeds, reducing stopping sight distances
and giving drivers more time to react to unforeseen hazards
(Ewing & Dumbaugh, 2009).
In addition, I find that street segments with more
sidewalk coverage decrease the likelihood of crashes involv-
ing elementary school pedestrians. This may be because, as
others have noted (Boarnet et al., 2005), connected side-
walks around schools reduce the number of pedestrians
who walk in the street or on road shoulders, decreasing
traffic conflicts between pedestrians and motor vehicles.

Sociodemographic Characteristics and
Crash Risk
Crash risks vary with sociodemographic characteristics,
as previous research has demonstrated (Abdel-Aty et al.,
2007; Clifton & Kreamer-Fults, 2007; LaScala, Gerber, &
Gruenewald, 2000; LaScala et al., 2004). I show that
neighborhoods around schools with a greater percentage of
people with low education levels (less than high school)
have an increased likelihood of crashes involving elemen-
tary school–aged child pedestrians during school travel
time. For each 1% increase in the population with less than
a high school education, there is a 28% increase in crash
risk. These findings may be explained by higher exposure
rates; that is, higher rates of walking in lower-income
neighborhoods.

Land Uses and Crash Risk
Land use matters in traffic safety: Street segments with
more residential parcels have lower probabilities of school
travel crashes. More specifically, every 1% increase in



23/09/15 11:33 AM

214 Journal of the American Planning Association, Summer 2015, Vol. 81, No. 3




Figure 2. School site layout, its relationship with surrounding commercial uses,


residential parcels in the school catchment area is accompa-
nied by a 38% decrease in the crash risk of elementary
school pedestrians. Conversely, for every 1% increase in
commercial parcels in the school buffer, there is a 148%
increase in the probability of school travel–related crashes.
Commercial land uses may increase traffic conflicts be-
tween pedestrians and vehicles; research clearly shows that
such crashes are higher in commercial and industrial areas
than in residential neighborhoods. A closer examination of
the locations of Austin’s school travel–related crashes
reveals that 65% of all crashes occur on roads where there
are adjacent commercial uses.
Figure 2 shows a school site layout, its relationship
with surrounding commercial uses, and the location of
adjacent school travel–related crashes. As the research
suggests, several school travel–related crashes occurred on
roads surrounded by commercial uses and the school. This
may be because there are no midblock crossings for pedes-
trians (although some research suggests that formal mid-
block crosswalks do not reduce crashes) and because there
are unmarked driveways that create confusion for both
motorists and pedestrians (Haleem et al., 2015; Samuel
et al., 2013).

Transit Stops and Crash Risk
Every 1% increase in the density of transit stops in the
100-foot buffer along street segments near schools is associ-
ated with a 92% increase in the probability of school



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 214





and relevant school travel–related crash locations.


travel–related crashes. This is due to three interrelated
factors: transit stops independently act as focal points
generating pedestrian activities; transit stops are usually
placed along busy arterials; and land uses near transit stops
usually involve commercial activities. In the study area,
68% of transit stops are located along arterial roads expos-
ing transit commuters to high-speed traffic, especially at
intersections. Moreover, as Figure 3 shows, more than 60%
of land uses near transit stops within the 100-foot buffers
around schools in the study area are commercial uses,
which might generate even more pedestrian activities and
attract more vehicle traffic.


A Role for Planning in School Safety

Schools are high-risk crash locations for elementary
school–aged pedestrians. Unfortunately, researchers have not
paid enough attention to the combined impacts of commu-
nity design elements—adjoining land use, the location of
transit stops, the existence and state of repair of pedestrian
infrastructure and signalization, and the volume and speed
of traffic on adjacent roadways—on the safety of school
travel. This research shows that street segments with higher
speed limits (e.g., highways/interstates and arterials) and
traffic-generating land uses increase the probability of school
travel–related crashes, while street segments with connected
sidewalks decrease the school travel–related crash risk.



23/09/15 11:33 AM

Yu: How Differences in Roadways Affect School Travel Safety




Figure 3. Land uses and road types around transit stops.


The results of this study confirm previous research but
also offer important new insights to planning practitioners
trying to increase human-powered travel to school. It is
crucial that stakeholders from different levels of govern-
ment and from different agencies, from the health depart-
ment to school districts, from the planning department to
law enforcement officials, collaborate to develop strategies
to address traffic safety hazards around schools. These
collaborative efforts need to address safety issues from a
dual perspective, first by working to change the existing
infrastructure and use of roads to better address the traffic
problems that children currently face walking to school,
and then to better site schools and better control the
roadways and land uses around them in the future. I sug-
gest three interrelated ways that planners can do so, col-
laborating with a wide range of stakeholders.
First, planners should work with traffic engineers to
prioritize improvements around schools that improve school
travel safety, including reducing speeds through enforcement
and traffic devices and identifying and treating locations
with high potential for conflicts between child pedestrians
and vehicles, such as driveways, intersections, and cross-
walks. As new information becomes available on the efficacy
of various pedestrian treatments, particularly those geared to
schoolchildren, planners should work with traffic engineers
and law enforcement officials to incorporate those improve-
ments into roadways and facilities around schools.
Second, planners, school officials, crossing guards,
community leaders, and parents should work together to
identify hot spots or places where conflicts between



RJPA_A_1080599_colour.indd 215
215







school-aged pedestrians and vehicles have often occurred.
Current school site planning guidelines suggest locating
schools near arterials to make it easier for buses to access the
school (Cooner et al., 2003), which means that schools are
often located near commercial areas on heavily trafficked
streets, demonstrably increasing dangerous conflicts between
vehicles and pedestrians. Planners should work with school
districts to better coordinate existing automobile-oriented
access to schools as well as pedestrian-friendly access. This
might include reducing commercial uses around existing
schools where possible and definitely when new schools are
designed and built. Planners should also focus on reducing
the width and speed of adjacent arterials, both initially for
existing schools and over time as new schools are built.
Moreover, planners should work to retrofit areas around
current schools with connected sidewalk networks while
ensuring that new schools have such sidewalk networks.
Third, to focus on future needs, neighborhood planners
must work with school districts to better integrate school
siting into comprehensive planning processes.
Overall, planners should seek to create pedestrian-
friendly schools that reduce or overcome current barriers to
safe, human-powered school travel. To achieve all these
objectives, planners must work collaboratively with a wide
variety of agencies and organizations at different levels of
government as well as with parents and neighborhood
residents to improve school travel safety around current
schools and to ensure that new schools are sited and
planned in ways that avoid the many traffic safety problems
that current schools face.



23/09/15 11:33 AM
