

Transport Policy 20 (2012) 75–81



Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect


Transport Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tranpol




From barrier elimination to barrier negotiation: A qualitative study of
parents’ attitudes about active travel for elementary school trips
Kelly Draper Zuniga n
Queensland University of Technology, 2 George Street, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane 4001, QLD, Australia




a r t i c l e i n f o                                 abstract

Available online 17 January 2012                      This paper examines parents’ responses to key factors associated with mode choices for school trips.
Keywords:                                             The research was conducted with parents of elementary school students in Denver Colorado as part of a
Active school travel                                  larger investigation of school travel.
Parent attitudes                                          School-based active travel programs aim to encourage students to walk or bike to school more
Choice behavior                                       frequently. To that end, planning research has identi<U+FB01>ed an array of factors associated with parents’
Inclination                                           decisions to drive children to school. Many <U+FB01>ndings are interpreted as ‘barriers’ to active travel,
Active travel intervention                            implying that parents have similar objectives with respect to travel mode choices and that parents
respond similarly and consistently to external conditions. While the conclusions are appropriate in
forecasting demand and mode share with large populations, they are generally too coarse for programs
that aim to in<U+FB02>uence travel behavior with individuals and small groups.
This research uses content analysis of interview transcripts to examine the contexts of factors
associated with parents’ mode choices for trips to and from elementary school. Short, semi-structured
interviews were conducted with 65 parents from 12 Denver Public Elementary Schools that had been
selected to receive 2007–08 Safe Routes to School non-infrastructure grants. Transcripts were analyzed
using Nvivo 8.0 to <U+FB01>nd out how parents respond to selected factors that are often described in planning
literature as ‘barriers’ to active travel.
Two contrasting themes emerged from the analysis: barrier elimination and barrier negotiation.
Regular active travel appears to diminish parents’ perceptions of barriers so that negotiation
becomes second nature. Findings from this study suggest that intervention should build capacity and
inclination in order to increase rates of active travel.
& 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction                                                                         children’s health by increasing time spent in moderate physical
activity (Davison et al., 2008; Tudor-Locke et al., 2001; Ogden
School-based active travel programs aim to encourage more                            et al., 2002; Cooper et al., 2005). For example, the U.S. Department
students to walk or bike to school more frequently than they                            of Health and Human Services has identi<U+FB01>ed increasing rates of
currently do, potentially reversing a thirty year trend of increased                    walking and biking to school as a policy objective in Healthy
private automobile use. Statistics revealing the historic decline in                    People 2020 (USDHHS, 2011). A range of programmatic strategies
active travel are discussed elsewhere (see for example McDonald,                        have been used to accomplish that objective, although some
2007; Sirard and Slater, 2008). This paper examines parents’                            researchers argue that early efforts have been based more on
experiences of the school commute in order to guide the devel-                          intuition than evidence (Davison et al., 2008).
opment of that type of travel-behavior intervention.                                        Planning research conceptually outlines three dimensions of
Increasing rates of active school travel promises a range of                         individual travel behavior: obligations, opportunities and inclina-
bene<U+FB01>ts to children, their families and their communities. Policy                       tions (Stradling and Anable, 2008, Chapin, 1974). Those dimen-
makers take particular interest in active travel programs in order                      sions re<U+FB02>ect in more speci<U+FB01>c models for children’s school travel
to decrease traf<U+FB01>c congestion around schools (Pooley, 2005), to                         (McMillan, 2005), but stem from psychological models of choice
decrease the numbers of short car trips in general (Black et al.,                       behavior which discuss opportunities in terms of real and
2001; Akar and Clifton, 2009; Austroads, 2005), and to improve                          perceived behavioral control (Dijst and Schwanen, 2008;
Walker, 2006; Parkany et al., 2004). Eagly and Chaiken (1993)
posited that in attitudinal studies, researchers use perceived
n
Tel.: þ61 7 3138 9951.                                                            behavioral control as a proxy for real behavioral control to
E-mail address: kelly.zuniga@qut.edu.au                                           overcome the dif<U+FB01>culty of measuring the latter concept. Findings

0967-070X/$ - see front matter & 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2011.12.003









































































76                                                     K.D. Zuniga / Transport


from this study demonstrate a unique relationship between the
two concepts that is worthy of further investigation.
Given the obligation of school attendance, school-based active
travel policies and interventions address the other two broad
dimensions: opportunities for children to walk and bike to school,
and the inclination of children (and their parents) to take
advantage of those opportunities when they are given. Indivi-
dual programs address the two in<U+FB02>uences in varying degrees.
For example, the Safe Routes to School (SR2S) program uses a
comprehensive approach that includes engineering, education,
enforcement, encouragement, and evaluation, addressing oppor-
tunities as well as inclinations to walk or bike (Hubsmith, 2006).
By addressing engineering and enforcement, SR2S infrastruc-
ture programs aim to provide adequate infrastructure and thus
support opportunities for children to walk or bike to school.
Complementing that effort, SR2S non-infrastructure programs
provide educational programs, incentives and other events to
encourage children and parents to walk or bike, and thus to take
advantage of opportunities for active travel.
In order to address the opportunities and inclinations that
in<U+FB02>uence travel behavior, it is necessary to know which spe-
ci<U+FB01>c conditions in<U+FB02>uence parents’ choices. Planning research has
identi<U+FB01>ed a vast array of environmental (e.g., distance to school,
busy road, intersection density, etc.) and personal factors (e.g., family
approval, employment, parent BMI, etc.) associated with parents’
decisions to drive children to school (see for example Sirard and
Slater, 2008; Davison et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009).
In many cases, factors associated with car trips are interpreted
as barriers to active travel (Davison et al., 2008; Dellinger and
Staunton., 2002; Sirard and Slater, 2008; Cole et al., 2010; Pont
et al., 2009), suggesting that parents who encounter those condi-
tions will choose to drive if a car is available, rather than walk or
bike. Although certain conditions may be strongly associated with
driving, active travel still occurs at least part of the time for part
of the population, indicating that the barriers are not absolute.
The purpose of this study was to <U+FB01>nd out how parents negotiate
adverse conditions when they choose to walk or bike their children to
school. It expands current understanding of mode choice by examin-
ing a sometimes-fuzzy line between opportunity and inclination, and
between perceived and actual behavioral control. The research team
used qualitative methods to re-contextualize certain factors that are
often interpreted as ‘barriers’ in quantitative research. Data included
transcripts from 65 interviews conducted with parents of elementary
school students in Denver Colorado as part of a larger study of school
travel behavior. Findings from this study suggest that parents’
perceptions of opportunities relating to the school commute are as
much a function of their inclination to walk as they are a descrip-
tion of the opportunities afforded by environmental conditions. We
discovered a range of attitudes that included passive expectations for
barrier elimination as well as active efforts to negotiate barriers.
Regular active travel appears to diminish parents’ perceptions of
barriers so that negotiation becomes second nature. These <U+FB01>ndings
suggest that to increase rates of active travel, intervention should
build families’ inclination, experience and capacity for the activity by
helping them to plan the trips in advance, by disassociating active
travel with ideal conditions, and by staging special events. Most
importantly, the policy should recognize varying levels of inclination
and tailor intervention appropriately.


2. Interpretation of contextual conditions as barriers
to active travel

Research aiming to support active travel policy identi<U+FB01>es a
variety of factors associated with travel behaviors, but often
focuses attention on the factors that serve as ‘barriers’ to active
Policy 20 (2012) 75–81


travel (Dellinger and Staunton., 2002; DiGuiseppi, 1998;
Cole et al., 2010; Akar and Clifton, 2009; Schlossberg et al.,
2006; Zhu and Lee, 2009). For example, Dellinger and Staunton
(2002) analyzed results from the 1999 national Health Styles
Survey, which asked whether students walked or biked to school
and whether any of six speci<U+FB01>ed conditions (i.e., traf<U+FB01>c, crime,
distance, weather, school policy, or other) made it dif<U+FB01>cult to do
so. Of the six conditions, they found that long distances and
dangerous motor-vehicle traf<U+FB01>c were strongly associated with
students who do not walk, and therefore interpreted the condi-
tions as barriers to active school travel. Similarly, Zhu and Lee
(2009) surveyed parents from schools in Austin, Texas and found
several negative correlates to walking and biking such as distance,
safety concerns, and the presence of highways, convenience
stores, of<U+FB01>ce buildings and bus stops en route.
When the research interprets factors as ‘barriers’ to active
travel, it implies that people generally want to walk or bike, and it
implies that they respond to undesirable route conditions by
choosing to drive. In the case of school travel, it suggests that
parents do not allow their children to walk or bike to school
because they lack the opportunity to do so. For example, Dellinger
and Staunton (2002) found that students without barriers were
six times more likely to walk or bike to school. That conclusion
has important implications for policy because it suggests that it
may increase rates of active travel by addressing those barriers
and making active travel possible.
In some cases, the research identi<U+FB01>es both ‘barriers’ to and
‘enablers’ of active travel, which similarly implies that external
factors either prohibit or assist people in achieving their personal
goal of walking or biking (Davison et al., 2008; Pont et al., 2009;
Sirard and Slater, 2008; Zhu and Lee, 2009). For example, Zhu and
Lee (2009) found positive correlates to walking and biking to
school, such as parents’ and children’s positive attitudes and
regular walking behavior (for non-school trips), among other
factors. In this case, the <U+FB01>nding implies that the population
studied felt a strong desire to walk.
However, in reviews of school travel literature, both Sirard and
Slater (2008) and Pont et al. (2009) enumerated factors that the
research associates with various school travel choices, and
described them as either barriers or enablers of active travel to
give a general sense of the ways that they in<U+FB02>uence trends for the
populations studied. Because those reviews did not reveal what
proportions of the various study groups typically choose to walk
or drive in response to each type of factor (barrier or enabler),
their interpretations seem to equate each factor exclusively with
either active or non-active travel. Both reviews used tables to
present the factors which emphasized the categorical distinctions
(Pont et al., 2009; Sirard and Slater, 2008). That black and white
interpretation of the research <U+FB01>ndings implies homogeneity in the
population’s values and responses.
The problem with this common interpretation of school travel
research is that an important dimension of the <U+FB01>ndings is lost,
making them too coarse for programs that aim to in<U+FB02>uence travel
behavior with smaller groups. That is, how did the portion of
respondents who chose to walk or ride bikes at least part of the
time negotiate the conditions that were interpreted as barriers?
This study expands the current research by examining how
parents respond to barriers when they are encountered as part
of the school journey.


3. Study methods

In order to provide a <U+FB01>ner-grained analysis of travel behavior
with smaller groups, this project applied a cross-sectional, qua-
litative analysis of parents’ experiences of the school commute.

K.D. Zuniga / Transport


Data included transcripts of interviews that were conducted for a
larger study of school travel in Denver Colorado.

3.1. Site selection

As a magnet for outdoor enthusiasts, Denver provided an
appropriate setting to study parents’ experiences with active
travel modes for school trips. The climate and topography
naturally accommodate active travel; however, its proportion of
students walking or biking to school is similar to national levels
and has experienced a steady decline in the past several decades
(Gotthelf, 2007). To reverse that trend, the City of Denver is taking
a leadership role in school-based active travel intervention.
Political leaders have set progressive environmental goals for
the city, including efforts to decrease automobile traf<U+FB01>c and
harmful greenhouse gas emissions (Conover et al., 2006). Denver’s
City Council signed Proclamation 15 in March 2007, creating a
Safe Routes to School Coalition to develop a short- and long-term
action plan and to support Safe Routes to School programs
throughout the school district (Gotthelf, 2007).
We selected twelve public elementary schools as research sites
for a larger study of school travel based on their participation in
Denver’s Safe Routes to School non-infrastructure programs dur-
ing the 2007–2008 school year. Schools were located in a wide
variety of Denver neighborhoods, differing in physical design,
socio-economic status and other characteristics. The resulting
selection included communities ranging in income, as well as
schools with clear majorities of White, Hispanic and Black
enrollment.


3.2. Participants

Participation in the larger research project and in the Safe

Routes to School programs at each school provided access to key

informants that included staff and parents from each school. In

agreement with district-wide policy restricting the use of student

contact information, we primarily recruited parents during drop

off and pick up times at school entrances, visitor parking areas

and on the streets where they waited in cars. The research team

initially used a strati<U+FB01>ed sampling strategy to include respon-

dents from each school’s dominant racial and ethnic group(s), as

indicated by published statistical records, and to emphasize male

or female respondents at each school to re<U+FB02>ect observed propor-

tions among travel companions. Because mode split was not

previously documented for participating schools, and to avoid

implying that mode choice is absolute, we neither identi<U+FB01>ed nor

characterized respondents using that variable. However, <U+FB01>ndings

indicated a combination of travel modes used within the popula-

tion sampled, and may be described as representing viewpoints of
pedestrians and drivers. To achieve the sampling objectives, the
research team initially contacted 10 parents at each school. We
conducted interviews during <U+FB01>rst contact when possible, and
otherwise contacted them by telephone to organize a second
meeting. That process resulted in 64 recorded interviews, a 53.3%
return.

3.3. Data collection methods

Discussions with Safe Routes to School program facilitators
and other key informants guided the development of the inter-
view protocol. The protocol described the research as ‘‘a study of
parents’ experiences of the school commute’’, and included
clusters of questions relating to four topics: (1) decisions about
the trip to school, (2) companionship on the trip to school,
(3) mode of travel on the trip to school, and (4) changing
Policy 20 (2012) 75–81                                            77


commuting behavior. Interviews lasted for an average of 15 min
and were digitally recorded and transcribed.
Interviews approached the topic of school travel directly, but
withheld discussion of active travel as a policy goal to avoid
leading the respondents to answer a certain way. For example,
interviewers asked parents what types of things in<U+FB02>uence deci-
sions about the commute, and did not ask them to list obstacles
that prevent active travel. That approach allowed parents to
describe any issues they deemed relevant to the school commute
regardless of their typical mode of travel. The open questions also
allowed parents to explain their thought processes, rather than
assuming that mode choices necessarily re<U+FB02>ect the opportunity to
walk or bike.
Questions about commuting decisions, companionship and
travel mode provided insight into parents’ travel behavior from
their point of view. However, those questions implied typical
behavior and might have obscured day-to-day variations. To
clarify, interviewers encouraged respondents to describe trips
that they made in the past three days including destination,
distance, travel time and mode. The retrospective travel diary
helped parents to focus on speci<U+FB01>c trips and to describe their
responses to day-to-day conditions.
Questions about changing commuting behavior gave respon-
dents the opportunity to speculate about conditions that might
in<U+FB02>uence them to walk or bike more often than they currently do,
and to consider their intentions, which might differ from their
actual behaviors. That part of the interview introduced an active-
travel policy objective in some cases, but did not present speci<U+FB01>c
elements of intervention.

3.4. Analysis procedures

To examine parents’ responses to key factors associated with

mode choice for school travel, it was necessary to <U+FB01>rst identify the

factors that could be used as possible a priori codes. Through a

review of planning literature on the topic of active travel, the

research team identi<U+FB01>ed 75 unique factors associated with mode

choice for school travel. Due to the large number of factors and

large quantity of transcript text, we organized and analyzed the

data electronically, using Nvivo 8.0 software. To facilitate a

systematic approach to coding, we organized the factors into

a framework that included three broad categories – physical

environmental, socio-cultural, and personal. Lower level branches

were occupied by speci<U+FB01>c factors (e.g., age of youngest child).

Following the initial coding, we combined and eliminated some

branches to reduce redundancy. Using a constant comparative

technique, we examined the text in each category to identify

concepts relevant to our initial research question, namely how

parents addressed problems associated with the commute.


4. Findings

Results from this study suggest that parents’ opportunities
relating to the school commute not only depend on environmen-
tal conditions that allow active travel (real behavioral control),
but also depend on parents’ inclination and capacity to walk and
thus, their perceived behavioral control. The role of perceived
behavioral control is illustrated by two contrasting themes that
emerged in the analysis: barrier elimination and barrier negotia-
tion. Signi<U+FB01>cantly, evidence from this study suggests that regular
or habitual active travel may diminish perceptions of barriers
(perceived behavioral control) so that negotiation becomes sec-
ond nature. That transition suggests that experience may directly
in<U+FB02>uence parents’ capacity to use active travel, and therefore
increase their opportunity.

78                                                   K.D. Zuniga / Transport


4.1. Barrier elimination

Some statements suggested that barriers prevent parents from
walking or biking, and that obstacle elimination would be
necessary to make active travel possible. These statements <U+FB01>t
four types, characterized by varying levels of inclination to engage
in active travel.


4.1.1. First type – activism
In the <U+FB01>rst type, parents described opportunities to address
hazards through organized surveillance, such as walking school
buses or crossing guards. This type illustrates a gray area between
negotiation and elimination, because by choosing to personally or
collectively eliminate the barrier, the parents negotiate adverse
conditions on a meta-level. In the following example, a parent
describes an organized effort to improve pedestrian safety around
the school.

‘‘I’m in a safety concern program for the school, and we’re
trying to come up with ideas to make it safer for our kids to get
to school. [y] We’re trying to get parent volunteers to stand at
each of the corners of the schools and monitor the traf<U+FB01>c and
other students that come to the campus’’ (ED8).

Her participation in that ad hoc program indicates a degree of
inclination to walk or bike – at least for the parents choosing to
organize the intervention. That process has important policy
implications because it means that families who are inclined to
walk or bike may also be inclined to in<U+FB02>uence other families’
mode choices, thus magnifying the effects of formal intervention.


4.1.2. Second type – resistant speculation

In the second type, parents considered how they might need to

change their behavior to be able to walk or bike, but presented

each option without conviction or alternatively with an explana-

tion of why it would fail. For example, one parent stated,


‘‘I would need to wake up extra early to drop her off walking

and then either way I have to grab my car because I can’t go

walking to school because it’s a long way. And I can’t ride the

RTD because it is so time consuming and out of the way,
because my daughter enters at 7:45 and I have to be at school
at 9:00 so I can’t’’ (SM3).

This parent’s defensive response indicates her awareness of
active travel alternatives minus the capacity to comfortably
accomplish them.
In some cases, parents described their children’s heavy back-
packs as insurmountable obstacles. For example, one parent
stated ‘‘his backpack weighs 100 lbs! If anything were to allow
them to change their commute to school this would have to
change’’ (CO11). This parent did not discuss ways to decrease the
load or otherwise negotiate the barrier in order to walk or bike.
Similar to the speculations without conviction, this type of
statement indicated that the families recognized active travel
alternatives, but lacked capacity.
Other families consciously chose to send their children to
schools outside of their neighborhoods, making distance a barrier
to active travel. For example, one parent stated, ‘‘if they went to
the school that is closer to our neighborhood, they could bike to
that school or they could walk. But they don’t go to that school
right now because that school has a very low academic score’’
(BR8). This type of comment indicated that the families prioritize
academics and recognize the limiting impact that their decision
has on travel alternatives.
Policy 20 (2012) 75–81


4.1.3. Third type – miracle seeking
In the third type, parents stated conditions beyond immediate
reach or desirability, such as ‘‘if I quit my job’’ (SL3) or ‘‘if they had
an overpass’’ (CO19) or ‘‘if that school was on this side of Colorado
Boulevard’’ (CO19) or ‘‘when the kindergartener is in 3rd grade’’
(SL3). In some cases, they stated extreme conditions facetiously,
such as ‘‘they would need an armed escort’’ (BR8). This type of
statement indicates low inclination to attempt a mode change to
active travel and suggests that intervention should address
inclination <U+FB01>rst rather than attempting to meet demands for
environmental changes.


4.1.4. Fourth type – car dependence
In the fourth type, parents described complex ways that they
use driving to negotiate challenging schedules of school and
extracurricular activities for multiple children. These statements
suggest that the families’ inclination to use active travel modes is
very low because it is incompatible with lifestyle choices. This
condition has important implications for policy because it repre-
sents a socially constructed dependence on private car travel.
In one example, a parent described the driving commute for
two children to two schools as an obstacle that dictates the family
schedule. She says, ‘‘It’s hard, but we’ve managed it so far’’ (AN1),
indicating that they’ve found a system for negotiating their travel
time barrier. In contrast to barriers that prevent active travel, she
described a barrier to being able to get the kids to and from their
schools at all. In this case, the family had to adjust to a new school
that lacked an after school program.
Similarly, another parent described a complex carpooling
arrangement that includes multiple schools and changes each
day depending on extracurricular activities. Although the plan
required each parent to drive several legs of the trips each day, it

reduced the overall amount of driving for each family (ST11). In

this example, the families have negotiated time barriers that

might have prevented certain activities. However, they have not

considered negotiating barriers to active travel through radical

lifestyle changes.
Although parents’ comments often explicitly described expec-

tations of barrier elimination, these examples suggest that the

attitudes that they represent might be more effectively addressed

through capacity building at family and community levels.


4.2. Barrier negotiation

In contrast with the <U+FB01>rst examples, some statements suggest
that parents are able to negotiate undesirable conditions, challen-
ging the black and white interpretation of factors. Statements
relating to this theme <U+FB01>t into three types relating to when and
how the con<U+FB02>ict was perceived. The attitudes expressed by these
statements also re<U+FB02>ect stages of behavioral change, which may be
magni<U+FB01>ed through targeted intervention (Prochaska et al., 1994).


4.2.1. Variable travel choices
The clearest evidence that parents <U+FB01>nd ways to negotiate
barriers is that their travel behaviors are not constant. For
example, some parents allowed their children to walk or bike
by themselves ‘‘on occasion’’ (SL9) or ‘‘a few times, like once or
twice’’ (SM7) or ‘‘every once in a whiley if he begs’’ (SL3).
Some statements described regular patterns of variable beha-
vior. For example, one parent said ‘‘I take three kids in the
morning. I go back around noon to pick the youngest up, and in
the afternoon I will sometimes go again to pick up the other two,
but they usually walk home with friends and I meet them two
blocks away’’ (ED8).

K.D. Zuniga / Transport


Parents often recalled unique walking events that were out-
side their normal routine. For example, one parent stated ‘‘It’s a
pretty good distance, but we’ve walked before. We walked last
year. We had to walk to school day or something like that. But
yeah, it would take us a good minute to walk there’’ (PH2)
The variability of travel behaviors has important implications
for policy because it indicates both a degree of inclination to
engage in active travel and a capacity to do so. Families that have
participated in walk to school days or other active travel events

know that they can walk because they did it previously. By

encouraging families to gain experience, intervention can help
to build that capacity.

4.2.2. Planning ahead
Some parents considered how they might negotiate certain
barriers and concluded that it would require planning ahead or
organizing resources. In contrast to examples in Sections 4.1.2
and 4.1.3, these statements suggest a higher level of inclination to
engage in active travel. In the following cases, planning ahead
served to address relatively simple problems.

‘‘I would probably either walk with him [y] to at least get him
across a couple of streets I don’t consider safe’’ (CO9).

‘‘If I were in the middle of something, I would have to stop and
go get him, bring him home.’’ (SL6).

‘‘I don’t think that in elementary school I would have them
walk by themselvesy a group thoughy we have enough kids
over by where I am’’ (ED0).

‘‘I’ve already made a plan to take the bike. She’s got a new bike

and you know I pick her up from work every dayy we are
going to ride bikes to work every day, and then I have got a

basket that I’m going to put on my bike so I can mount her bike

in so that I can get it home at night. So we are going to start

riding’’ (ED0).

‘‘There’s a little bit involved. There’s a bit that goes into it. It’s
not just throwing on a sweater and driving them to school.

They have to prepare for what they are doing and wear the

proper shoes or boots for the weather’’ (ED3)

To encourage active travel with this group, intervention can
enhance parents’ capacity to plan for active travel by identifying

safer routes, and preparing students and their families to handle

adverse conditions.

In addition to the simple <U+FB01>xes, some statements described

plans to make signi<U+FB01>cant life changes in order to facilitate active

travel. For example, a few parents described trips in which they

negotiated distance as a barrier. Some considered the possibility

of moving closer to the school as a way of negotiating the long
commuting distance and associated fuel costs (SL7). Others
suggested that children should negotiate dif<U+FB01>cult distances. One
parent said, ‘‘<U+FB01>ve miles is quite a ways to walk to school, but I can
see where that would be a good thing for a kid because it takes a
little struggle, and struggle is good’’ (AN3).

4.2.3. Impromptu changes
Some statements suggested that parents have a latent capacity
to negotiate barriers if occasion demands or if they feel so
inclined. For example, one parent stated ‘‘Once, I was late and I
dropped her off and let her run inside. I was completely paranoid;
I parked and walked to her school and walked inside to her class
to make sure she was there. It really freaked me out’’ (CO6). In
response to fear, this parent negotiated a time obstacle by
changing priorities. Although this scenario did not result in active
travel behavior, it has important policy implications because it
Policy 20 (2012) 75–81                                                79


suggests that opportunity is relative rather than absolute. Another
parent described a central role of inclination in overcoming
barriers to active travel. He stated ‘‘It’s just something I have to
want to do in my life’’ (ED1).
Numerous statements described parents responding to bar-
riers by aborting active travel plans in favor of driving. The
following examples include driving in response to oversleeping,
school projects, and adverse weather conditions:

‘‘If he’s overslept I’ll drop him off to make sure he gets there on

time. If it was really cold out, I would drive him as well’’ (AN2).

‘‘Sometimes if I had to be at school or if he had a project or
poster to carry I would drive him’’ (AN5).

‘‘We only drive when the weather is real bad, like when it
snows more than a couple inches or when it’s really cold.
When it’s nice out we walk, which is most of the time, but
when it isn’t I give her a ride’’ (AN12).
‘‘If it is cold or a lot of snow has fallen the night before I will
give her a ride. She usually decides what weather she is willing
to walk in. If it is nicer outside she usually walks and if I am

late to work I will often drop her off a little farther than the
front entrance even when it is not nice out because traf<U+FB01>c in
that area can get hectic in the morning’’ (ED5).

The tendency to drive as a backup plan has important
implications for policy because the backup plan can easily
become the norm if adverse conditions occur regularly. Thus it
is important for active travel programs to encourage families to
negotiate barriers rather than associating active travel with ideal

conditions.


4.2.4. Habitual – negotiating hazards en route

Some statements that identi<U+FB01>ed hazards also indicated occa-

sions in which parents negotiated the problems en route. For

example, several parents explain how they manage to cross busy
streets that do not have of<U+FB01>cial crossing guards.

‘‘No, there aren’t [guards]. That’s one of the reasons why it

takes so long. We have to wait at the corner one block from

the house because it’s really busy, especially in the afternoon’’
(ED8).

‘‘Sometimes, you have to make sure that all of the cars come to

a stop because some whip through. And then it’s such a quick

light. They are running across with their bikes and you have to

make sure they stop, which takes a few seconds, and then

the hand starts <U+FB02>ashing. I think a lot of people on that side

are concerned about that. I know that other people won’t

walk’’ (SL8).

Parents’ capacity to negotiate barriers en route has important
implications for policy. First and foremost, it indicates that these
barriers are penetrable. Secondly, it illustrates the signi<U+FB01>cance of
inclination (and real versus perceived behavioral control) in travel
choices, since other parents presented the same safety hazards as
the reasons that they choose to drive.

4.3. Perceptions of barriers diminished with regular active travel

There is a blurred distinction between perceptions of nego-
tiated barriers and perceptions of no barriers for families that
regularly walk or ride bikes to school. The idea that perceptions of
barriers diminished with regular active travel emerged in the
analysis as a separate theme. In the following examples, parents
who currently use active travel modes speculate about how they
would negotiate barriers if they were encountered.

80                                                     K.D. Zuniga / Transport


Some parents indicated that they were aware of potential
barriers to active travel that do not currently affect their travel
choices, but do affect families that live in other parts of the
neighborhood. For example, one parent said ‘‘She walks with a
friend who lives across the street. We do not live far and there are
no major roads between our house and the school’’ (ED5). This
type of comment suggests that the family might alter their travel
behavior if confronted with barriers. Although they currently use
active travel and do not perceive any adverse conditions, they
may not be deeply committed to active travel.
Other parents recognized potential barriers, but indicated how
they would approach them if necessary. In the following example,
a parent recognizes that negotiating certain barriers would
require additional planning.

‘‘If we lived more than a few miles from school I would

probably think about driving him to school, or he could take

the bus maybe. If he had to cross any major intersections I

would think a little more about the trip, for safety concerns.

Other than that though, I see no reason why more children

can’t make the trip themselves’’ (ED6).

That type of statement indicates a higher degree of inclination
and commitment to active travel, which could be nurtured
through intervention.
In some cases, parents described their response to adverse
conditions that sometimes occur during their active commute to
school. The following comments suggest that the families are
committed to their active travel behavior and are prepared to
negotiate conditions as they arise.

‘‘The walk takes about 8–10 minutes, sometimes a little longer
[y]. When it snows or when we have to wait for traf<U+FB01>c it may
take a little longer’’ (AN12).

‘‘It gives people exercise when they’re able to get out and walk

to school, or would have walked the kids to school every day

or whatever. Even if it’s, you know, snowy or whatever, we’ll

still go for a walk every day. So that’s good.’’ (CO3).

‘‘Even if they were going to close the school (for weather) I would
send them walking because they need the exercise’’ (LO5).

‘‘Even if it is snowing buckets we make them walk, ha ha, even
in a blizzard they walk. It isn’t a big deal’’ (SL4).
Although many of the families in these examples use active
travel modes regularly, it is important for intervention to assess
levels of inclination and commitment and to secure each family’s
capacity to negotiate barriers when they are encountered.


5. Discussion and conclusions

This study investigates how parents negotiate barriers when they
walk or bike their children to school. The research team examined
transcripts of 65 interviews conducted with parents for a larger study
of school travel to re-contextualize factors commonly identi<U+FB01>ed as
‘barriers’ to active travel. Two contrasting themes emerged from the
analysis – barrier elimination and barrier negotiation – demonstrating
a unique relationship between key behavioral choice-theory concepts
of real and perceived behavioral control. That relationship merits
further investigation. The distinction between the two themes has
important implications for active travel policy, which has the poten-
tial to emphasize one or the other attitude.
Barrier elimination implies that someone or something (i.e., the
school district, the local authorities, the department of transportation,
etc.) must make conditions ideal to allow travelers to walk or bike. In
many cases, parents explained and excused their mode choices in
Policy 20 (2012) 75–81


terms of barriers that prevented active alternatives. Those explana-
tions <U+FB01>t four broad attitudinal categories (Activism, Resistent Spec-
ulation, Miracle-Seeking, and Auto-Dependence), and indicated
varying levels of inclination to engage in active travel.
Policy that aims to create pedestrian-friendly environments
inevitably emphasizes barrier elimination by making improve-
ments to urban form as a prerequisite to walking or biking. That
approach is supported by research that suggests that elements of
urban design indirectly in<U+FB02>uence parents’ mode choices for their
children’s school trips. However, the impact of urban form is
mediated by the ways that it in<U+FB02>uences objective and perceived
traf<U+FB01>c and neighborhood safety (McMillan, 2005). Thus, policy
may also in<U+FB02>uence mode choices by addressing those perceptions,
even if physical conditions remain unchanged.
Policy may also emphasize barrier elimination by focusing

attention on safety issues. Research in the U.K. has found that

certain pedestrian safety campaigns have even diminished inde-

pendent mobility by heightening awareness of hazards and

discouraging active travel (Hillman et al., 1990). Programs such

as Safe Routes to School may have a similar effect on perceptions

of pedestrian safety if they survey parents in order to identify
hazards along travel routes. Active travel programs should be
careful not to condition families to associate active travel with
ideal conditions because those conditions are so easily inter-
rupted by weather, traf<U+FB01>c patterns, neighborhood demographics
and other factors. Instead, they should build families’ capacity to
negotiate those conditions when they are encountered.
In contrast, barrier negotiation implies that given some undesir-
able conditions, travelers can still <U+FB01>nd ways to walk or bike. Parents
often explained how they negotiated barriers when they encountered
them, but also considered how they could plan for them in advance.
Those explanations <U+FB01>t three broad attitudinal categories based on
how and when they perceived the barriers, and also on their stage of
behavioral change. These statements also indicated varying levels of

inclination to engage in active travel.

Travelers cannot passively wait for barrier negotiation to occur

before they choose their travel mode. It requires a conscious

effort, and therefore a stronger inclination to walk or bike. The
role of policy in that case should be to increase parents’ capacity
to walk or bike children to school, and to encourage them to
carefully negotiate adverse conditions with proper equipment
and behavior rather than driving as a convenient backup plan.
International Walk to School Day and other planned active travel
events may serve this purpose well because they encourage
families to plan ahead for a temporary mode change – thus
increasing experience, and because they build the families’
capacity to address undesirable conditions along the way. Walk-
ing School Bus (WSB) programs might similarly help to build
children’s capacity to walk to school. By piquing parents’ interest
in the social activity even temporarily, they can help families to
develop shared experience dealing with traf<U+FB01>c conditions, and
prepare children to walk alone or with friends (Kingham and
Ussher, 2005). Again, planning ahead for a temporary mode
change can result in expanded capacity for active travel.
Most important is that policy-makers must recognize the
diversity of parents’ attitudes. It should not be assumed that all
parents share a desire to walk or bike to school and that they lack
the opportunity to do so. Instead, intervention should be tailored
to varying levels of inclination, experience and capacity to
magnify its impact on individual travelers’ behaviors, and ulti-
mately on rates of active travel.

References

Akar, Gulsah, Clifton, Kelly J., 2009. In<U+FB02>uence of individual perceptions and bicycle
infrastructure on decision to bike. Transportation Research Record, 165–172.
